 
        THE CONSERVATIVE
 
        _A Lecture delivered at the Masonic Temple,
        Boston, December 9, 1841_

        The two parties which divide the state, the party of
Conservatism and that od have disputed the possession of the world
ever since it was made.  This quarrel is the subject of civil
history.  The conservative party established the reverend hierarchies
and monarchies of the most ancient world.  The battle of patrician
and plebeian, of parent state and colony, of old usage and
accommodation to new facts, of the rich and the poor, reappears in
all countries and times.  The war rages not only in battle-fields, in
national councils, and ecclesiastical synods, but agitates every
man's bosom with opposing advantages every hour.  On rolls the old
world meantime, and now one, now the other gets the day, and still
the fight renews itself as if for the first time, under new names and
hot personalities.

        Such an irreconcilable antagonism, of course, must have a
correspondent depth of seat in the human constitution.  It is the
opposition of Past and Future, of Memory and Hope, of the
Understanding and the Reason.  It is the primal antagonism, the
appearance in trifles of the two poles of nature.

        There is a fragment of old fable which seems somehow to have
been dropped from the current mythologies, which may deserve
attention, as it appears to relate to this subject.

        Saturn grew weary of sitting alone, or with none but the great
Uranus or Heaven beholding him, and he created an oyster.  Then he
would act again, but he made nothing more, but went on creating the
race of oysters.  Then Uranus cried, `a new work, O Saturn! the old
is not good again.'

        Saturn replied.  `I fear.  There is not only the alternative of
making and not making, but also of unmaking.  Seest thou the great
sea, how it ebbs and flows? so is it with me; my power ebbs; and if I
put forth my hands, I shall not do, but undo.  Therefore I do what I
have done; I hold what I have got; and so I resist Night and Chaos.'

        `O Saturn,' replied Uranus, `thou canst not hold thine own, but
by making more.  Thy oysters are barnacles and cockles, and with the
next flowing of the tide, they will be pebbles and sea-foam.'

        `I see,' rejoins Saturn, `thou art in league with Night, thou
art become an evil eye; thou spakest from love; now thy words smite
me with hatred.  I appeal to Fate, must there not be rest?' -- `I
appeal to Fate also,' said Uranus, `must there not be motion?' -- But
Saturn was silent, and went on making oysters for a thousand years.

        After that, the word of Uranus came into his mind like a ray of
the sun, and he made Jupiter; and then he feared again; and nature
froze, the things that were made went backward, and, to save the
world, Jupiter slew his father Saturn.

        This may stand for the earliest account of a conversation on
politics between a Conservative and a Radical, which has come down to
us.  It is ever thus.  It is the counteraction of the centripetal and
the centrifugal forces.  Innovation is the salient energy;
Conservatism the pause on the last movement.  `That which is was made
by God,' saith Conservatism.  `He is leaving that, he is entering
this other;' rejoins Innovation.

        There is always a certain meanness in the argument of
conservatism, joined with a certain superiority in its fact.  It
affirms because it holds.  Its fingers clutch the fact, and it will
not open its eyes to see a better fact.  The castle, which
conservatism is set to defend, is the actual state of things, good
and bad.  The project of innovation is the best possible state of
things.  Of course, conservatism always has the worst of the
argument, is always apologizing, pleading a necessity, pleading that
to change would be to deteriorate; it must saddle itself with the
mountainous load of the violence and vice of society, must deny the
possibility of good, deny ideas, and suspect and stone the prophet;
whilst innovation is always in the right, triumphant, attacking, and
sure of final success.  Conservatism stands on man's confessed
limitations; reform on his indisputable infinitude; conservatism on
circumstance; liberalism on power; one goes to make an adroit member
of the social frame; the other to postpone all things to the man
himself; conservatism is debonnair and social; reform is individual
and imperious.  We are reformers in spring and summer; in autumn and
winter, we stand by the old; reformers in the morning, conservers at
night.  Reform is affirmative, conservatism negative; conservatism
goes for comfort, reform for truth.  Conservatism is more candid to
behold another's worth; reform more disposed to maintain and increase
its own.  Conservatism makes no poetry, breathes no prayer, has no
invention; it is all memory.  Reform has no gratitude, no prudence,
no husbandry.  It makes a great difference to your figure and to your
thought, whether your foot is advancing or receding.  Conservatism
never puts the foot forward; in the hour when it does that, it is not
establishment, but reform.  Conservatism tends to universal seeming
and treachery, believes in a negative fate; believes that men's
temper governs them; that for me, it avails not to trust in
principles; they will fail me; I must bend a little; it distrusts
nature; it thinks there is a general law without a particular
application, -- law for all that does not include any one.  Reform in
its antagonism inclines to asinine resistance, to kick with hoofs; it
runs to egotism and bloated self-conceit; it runs to a bodiless
pretension, to unnatural refining and elevation, which ends in
hypocrisy and sensual reaction.

        And so whilst we do not go beyond general statements, it may be
safely affirmed of these two metaphysical antagonists, that each is a
good half, but an impossible whole.  Each exposes the abuses of the
other, but in a true society, in a true man, both must combine.
Nature does not give the crown of its approbation, namely, beauty, to
any action or emblem or actor, but to one which combines both these
elements; not to the rock which resists the waves from age to age,
nor to the wave which lashes incessantly the rock, but the superior
beauty is with the oak which stands with its hundred arms against the
storms of a century, and grows every year like a sapling; or the
river which ever flowing, yet is found in the same bed from age to
age; or, greatest of all, the man who has subsisted for years amid
the changes of nature, yet has distanced himself, so that when you
remember what he was, and see what he is, you say, what strides! what
a disparity is here!

        Throughout nature the past combines in every creature with the
present.  Each of the convolutions of the sea-shell, each node and
spine marks one year of the fish's life, what was the mouth of the
shell for one season, with the addition of new matter by the growth
of the animal, becoming an ornamental node.  The leaves and a shell
of soft wood are all that the vegetation of this summer has made, but
the solid columnar stem, which lifts that bank of foliage into the
air to draw the eye and to cool us with its shade, is the gift and
legacy of dead and buried years.

        In nature, each of these elements being always present, each
theory has a natural support.  As we take our stand on Necessity, or
on Ethics, shall we go for the conservative, or for the reformer.  If
we read the world historically, we shall say, Of all the ages, the
present hour and circumstance is the cumulative result; this is the
best throw of the dice of nature that has yet been, or that is yet
possible.  If we see it from the side of Will, or the Moral
Sentiment, we shall accuse the Past and the Present, and require the
impossible of the Future.

        But although this bifold fact lies thus united in real nature,
and so united that no man can continue to exist in whom both these
elements do not work, yet men are not philosophers, but are rather
very foolish children, who, by reason of their partiality, see
everything in the most absurd manner, and are the victims at all
times of the nearest object.  There is even no philosopher who is a
philosopher at all times.  Our experience, our perception is
conditioned by the need to acquire in parts and in succession, that
is, with every truth a certain falsehood.  As this is the invariable
method of our training, we must give it allowance, and suffer men to
learn as they have done for six millenniums, a word at a time, to
pair off into insane parties, and learn the amount of truth each
knows, by the denial of an equal amount of truth.  For the present,
then, to come at what sum is attainable to us, we must even hear the
parties plead as parties.

        That which is best about conservatism, that which, though it
cannot be expressed in detail, inspires reverence in all, is the
Inevitable.  There is the question not only, what the conservative
says for himself? but, why must he say it?  What insurmountable fact
binds him to that side?  Here is the fact which men call Fate, and
fate in dread degrees, fate behind fate, not to be disposed of by the
consideration that the Conscience commands this or that, but
necessitating the question, whether the faculties of man will play
him true in resisting the facts of universal experience?  For
although the commands of the Conscience are _essentially_ absolute,
they are _historically_ limitary.  Wisdom does not seek a literal
rectitude, but an useful, that is, a conditioned one, such a one as
the faculties of man and the constitution of things will warrant.
The reformer, the partisan loses himself in driving to the utmost
some specialty of right conduct, until his own nature and all nature
resist him; but Wisdom attempts nothing enormous and disproportioned
to its powers, nothing which it cannot perform or nearly perform.  We
have all a certain intellection or presentiment of reform existing in
the mind, which does not yet descend into the character, and those
who throw themselves blindly on this lose themselves.  Whatever they
attempt in that direction, fails, and reacts suicidally on the actor
himself.  This is the penalty of having transcended nature.  For the
existing world is not a dream, and cannot with impunity be treated as
a dream; neither is it a disease; but it is the ground on which you
stand, it is the mother of whom you were born.  Reform converses with
possibilities, perchance with impossibilities; but here is sacred
fact.  This also was true, or it could not be: it had life in it, or
it could not have existed; it has life in it, or it could not
continue.  Your schemes may be feasible, or may not be, but this has
the endorsement of nature and a long friendship and cohabitation with
the powers of nature.  This will stand until a better cast of the
dice is made.  The contest between the Future and the Past is one
between Divinity entering, and Divinity departing.  You are welcome
to try your experiments, and, if you can, to displace the actual
order by that ideal republic you announce, for nothing but God will
expel God.  But plainly the burden of proof must lie with the
projector.  We hold to this, until you can demonstrate something
better.

        The system of property and law goes back for its origin to
barbarous and sacred times; it is the fruit of the same mysterious
cause as the mineral or animal world.  There is a natural sentiment
and prepossession in favor of age, of ancestors, of barbarous and
aboriginal usages, which is a homage to the element of necessity and
divinity which is in them.  The respect for the old names of places,
of mountains, and streams, is universal.  The Indian and barbarous
name can never be supplanted without loss.  The ancients tell us that
the gods loved the Ethiopians for their stable customs; and the
Egyptians and Chaldeans, whose origin could not be explored, passed
among the junior tribes of Greece and Italy for sacred nations.

        Moreover, so deep is the foundation of the existing social
system, that it leaves no one out of it.  We may be partial, but Fate
is not.  All men have their root in it.  You who quarrel with the
arrangements of society, and are willing to embroil all, and risk the
indisputable good that exists, for the chance of better, live, move,
and have your being in this, and your deeds contradict your words
every day.  For as you cannot jump from the ground without using the
resistance of the ground, nor put out the boat to sea, without
shoving from the shore, nor attain liberty without rejecting
obligation, so you are under the necessity of using the Actual order
of things, in order to disuse it; to live by it, whilst you wish to
take away its life.  The past has baked your loaf, and in the
strength of its bread you would break up the oven.  But you are
betrayed by your own nature.  You also are conservatives.  However
men please to style themselves, I see no other than a conservative
party.  You are not only identical with us in your needs, but also in
your methods and aims.  You quarrel with my conservatism, but it is
to build up one of your own; it will have a new beginning, but the
same course and end, the same trials, the same passions; among the
lovers of the new I observe that there is a jealousy of the newest,
and that the seceder from the seceder is as damnable as the pope
himself.

        On these and the like grounds of general statement,
conservatism plants itself without danger of being displaced.
Especially before this _personal_ appeal, the innovator must confess
his weakness, must confess that no man is to be found good enough to
be entitled to stand champion for the principle.  But when this great
tendency comes to practical encounters, and is challenged by young
men, to whom it is no abstraction, but a fact of hunger, distress,
and exclusion from opportunities, it must needs seem injurious.  The
youth, of course, is an innovator by the fact of his birth.  There he
stands, newly born on the planet, a universal beggar, with all the
reason of things, one would say, on his side.  In his first
consideration how to feed, clothe, and warm himself, he is met by
warnings on every hand, that this thing and that thing have owners,
and he must go elsewhere.  Then he says; If I am born into the earth,
where is my part? have the goodness, gentlemen of this world, to show
me my wood-lot, where I may fell my wood, my field where to plant my
corn, my pleasant ground where to build my cabin.

        `Touch any wood, or field, or house-lot, on your peril,' cry
all the gentlemen of this world; `but you may come and work in ours,
for us, and we will give you a piece of bread.'

        And what is that peril?

        Knives and muskets, if we meet you in the act; imprisonment, if
we find you afterward.

        And by what authority, kind gentlemen?

        By our law.

        And your law, -- is it just?

        As just for you as it was for us.  We wrought for others under
this law, and got our lands so.

        I repeat the question, Is your law just?

        Not quite just, but necessary.  Moreover, it is juster now than
it was when we were born; we have made it milder and more equal.

        I will none of your law, returns the youth; it encumbers me.  I
cannot understand, or so much as spare time to read that needless
library of your laws.  Nature has sufficiently provided me with
rewards and sharp penalties, to bind me not to transgress.  Like the
Persian noble of old, I ask "that I may neither command nor obey." I
do not wish to enter into your complex social system.  I shall serve
those whom I can, and they who can will serve me.  I shall seek those
whom I love, and shun those whom I love not, and what more can all
your laws render me?

        With equal earnestness and good faith, replies to this
plaintiff an upholder of the establishment, a man of many virtues:

        Your opposition is feather-brained and overfine.  Young man, I
have no skill to talk with you, but look at me; I have risen early
and sat late, and toiled honestly, and painfully for very many years.
I never dreamed about methods; I laid my bones to, and drudged for
the good I possess; it was not got by fraud, nor by luck, but by
work, and you must show me a warrant like these stubborn facts in
your own fidelity and labor, before I suffer you, on the faith of a
few fine words, to ride into my estate, and claim to scatter it as
your own.

        Now you touch the heart of the matter, replies the reformer.
To that fidelity and labor, I pay homage.  I am unworthy to arraign
your manner of living, until I too have been tried.  But I should be
more unworthy, if I did not tell you why I cannot walk in your steps.
I find this vast network, which you call property, extended over the
whole planet.  I cannot occupy the bleakest crag of the White Hills
or the Alleghany Range, but some man or corporation steps up to me to
show me that it is his.  Now, though I am very peaceable, and on my
private account could well enough die, since it appears there was
some mistake in my creation, and that I have been _mis_sent to this
earth, where all the seats were already taken, -- yet I feel called
upon in behalf of rational nature, which I represent, to declare to
you my opinion, that, if the Earth is yours, so also is it mine.  All
your aggregate existences are less to me a fact than is my own; as I
am born to the earth, so the Earth is given to me, what I want of it
to till and to plant; nor could I, without pusillanimity, omit to
claim so much.  I must not only have a name to live, I must live.  My
genius leads me to build a different manner of life from any of
yours.  I cannot then spare you the whole world.  I love you better.
I must tell you the truth practically; and take that which you call
yours.  It is God's world and mine; yours as much as you want, mine
as much as I want.  Besides, I know your ways; I know the symptoms of
the disease.  To the end of your power, you will serve this lie which
cheats you.  Your want is a gulf which the possession of the broad
earth would not fill.  Yonder sun in heaven you would pluck down from
shining on the universe, and make him a property and privacy, if you
could; and the moon and the north star you would quickly have
occasion for in your closet and bed-chamber.  What you do not want
for use, you crave for ornament, and what your convenience could
spare, your pride cannot.

        On the other hand, precisely the defence which was set up for
the British Constitution, namely, that with all its admitted defects,
rotten boroughs and monopolies, it worked well, and substantial
justice was somehow done; the wisdom and the worth did get into
parliament, and every interest did by right, or might, or sleight,
get represented; -- the same defence is set up for the existing
institutions.  They are not the best; they are not just; and in
respect to you, personally, O brave young man! they cannot be
justified.  They have, it is most true, left you no acre for your
own, and no law but our law, to the ordaining of which, you were no
party.  But they do answer the end, they are really friendly to the
good; unfriendly to the bad; they second the industrious, and the
kind; they foster genius.  They really have so much flexibility as to
afford your talent and character, on the whole, the same chance of
demonstration and success which they might have, if there was no law
and no property.

        It is trivial and merely superstitious to say that nothing is
given you, no outfit, no exhibition; for in this institution of
_credit_, which is as universal as honesty and promise in the human
countenance, always some neighbor stands ready to be bread and land
and tools and stock to the young adventurer.  And if in any one
respect they have come short, see what ample retribution of good they
have made.  They have lost no time and spared no expense to collect
libraries, museums, galleries, colleges, palaces, hospitals,
observatories, cities.  The ages have not been idle, nor kings slack,
nor the rich niggardly.  Have we not atoned for this small offence
(which we could not help) of leaving you no right in the soil, by
this splendid indemnity of ancestral and national wealth?  Would you
have been born like a gipsy in a hedge, and preferred your freedom on
a heath, and the range of a planet which had no shed or boscage to
cover you from sun and wind, -- to this towered and citied world? to
this world of Rome, and Memphis, and Constantinople, and Vienna, and
Paris, and London, and New York?  For thee Naples, Florence, and
Venice, for thee the fair Mediterranean, the sunny Adriatic; for thee
both Indies smile; for thee the hospitable North opens its heated
palaces under the polar circle; for thee roads have been cut in every
direction across the land, and fleets of floating palaces with every
security for strength, and provision for luxury, swim by sail and by
steam through all the waters of this world.  Every island for thee
has a town; every town a hotel.  Though thou wast born landless, yet
to thy industry and thrift and small condescension to the established
usage, -- scores of servants are swarming in every strange place with
cap and knee to thy command, scores, nay hundreds and thousands, for
thy wardrobe, thy table, thy chamber, thy library, thy leisure; and
every whim is anticipated and served by the best ability of the whole
population of each country.  The king on the throne governs for thee,
and the judge judges; the barrister pleads, the farmer tills, the
joiner hammers, the postman rides.  Is it not exaggerating a trifle
to insist on a formal acknowledgment of your claims, when these
substantial advantages have been secured to you?  Now can your
children be educated, your labor turned to their advantage, and its
fruits secured to them after your death.  It is frivolous to say, you
have no acre, because you have not a mathematically measured piece of
land.  Providence takes care that you shall have a place, that you
are waited for, and come accredited; and, as soon as you put your
gift to use, you shall have acre or acre's worth according to your
exhibition of desert, -- acre, if you need land; -- acre's worth, if
you prefer to draw, or carve, or make shoes, or wheels, to the
tilling of the soil.

        Besides, it might temper your indignation at the supposed wrong
which society has done you, to keep the question before you, how
society got into this predicament?  Who put things on this false
basis?  No single man, but all men.  No man voluntarily and
knowingly; but it is the result of that degree of culture there is in
the planet.  The order of things is as good as the character of the
population permits.  Consider it as the work of a great and
beneficent and progressive necessity, which, from the first pulsation
of the first animal life, up to the present high culture of the best
nations, has advanced thus far.  Thank the rude fostermother though
she has taught you a better wisdom than her own, and has set hopes in
your heart which shall be history in the next ages.  You are yourself
the result of this manner of living, this foul compromise, this
vituperated Sodom.  It nourished you with care and love on its
breast, as it had nourished many a lover of the right, and many a
poet, and prophet, and teacher of men.  Is it so irremediably bad?
Then again, if the mitigations are considered, do not all the
mischiefs virtually vanish?  The form is bad, but see you not how
every personal character reacts on the form, and makes it new?  A
strong person makes the law and custom null before his own will.
Then the principle of love and truth reappears in the strictest
courts of fashion and property.  Under the richest robes, in the
darlings of the selectest circles of European or American
aristocracy, the strong heart will beat with love of mankind, with
impatience of accidental distinctions, with the desire to achieve its
own fate, and make every ornament it wears authentic and real.

        Moreover, as we have already shown that there is no pure
reformer, so it is to be considered that there is no pure
conservative, no man who from the beginning to the end of his life
maintains the defective institutions; but he who sets his face like a
flint against every novelty, when approached in the confidence of
conversation, in the presence of friendly and generous persons, has
also his gracious and relenting motions, and espouses for the time
the cause of man; and even if this be a shortlived emotion, yet the
remembrance of it in private hours mitigates his selfishness and
compliance with custom.

        The Friar Bernard lamented in his cell on Mount Cenis the
crimes of mankind, and rising one morning before day from his bed of
moss and dry leaves, he gnawed his roots and berries, drank of the
spring, and set forth to go to Rome to reform the corruption of
mankind.  On his way he encountered many travellers who greeted him
courteously; and the cabins of the peasants and the castles of the
lords supplied his few wants.  When he came at last to Rome, his
piety and good will easily introduced him to many families of the
rich, and on the first day he saw and talked with gentle mothers with
their babes at their breasts, who told him how much love they bore
their children, and how they were perplexed in their daily walk lest
they should fail in their duty to them.  `What!' he said, `and this
on rich embroidered carpets, on marble floors, with cunning
sculpture, and carved wood, and rich pictures, and piles of books
about you?' -- `Look at our pictures and books,' they said, `and we
will tell you, good Father, how we spent the last evening.  These are
stories of godly children and holy families and romantic sacrifices
made in old or in recent times by great and not mean persons; and
last evening, our family was collected, and our husbands and brothers
discoursed sadly on what we could save and give in the hard times.'
Then came in the men, and they said, `What cheer, brother?  Does thy
convent want gifts?' Then the friar Bernard went home swiftly with
other thoughts than he brought, saying, `This way of life is wrong,
yet these Romans, whom I prayed God to destroy, are lovers, they are
lovers; what can I do?'

        The reformer concedes that these mitigations exist, and that,
if he proposed comfort, he should take sides with the establishment.
Your words are excellent, but they do not tell the whole.
Conservatism is affluent and openhanded, but there is a cunning
juggle in riches.  I observe that they take somewhat for everything
they give.  I look bigger, but am less; I have more clothes, but am
not so warm; more armor, but less courage; more books, but less wit.
What you say of your planted, builded and decorated world, is true
enough, and I gladly avail myself of its convenience; yet I have
remarked that what holds in particular, holds in general, that the
plant Man does not require for his most glorious flowering this pomp
of preparation and convenience, but the thoughts of some beggarly
Homer who strolled, God knows when, in the infancy and barbarism of
the old world; the gravity and sense of some slave Moses who leads
away his fellow slaves from their masters; the contemplation of some
Scythian Anacharsis; the erect, formidable valor of some Dorian
townsmen in the town of Sparta; the vigor of Clovis the Frank, and
Alfred the Saxon, and Alaric the Goth, and Mahomet, Ali, and Omar the
Arabians, Saladin the Curd, and Othman the Turk, sufficed to build
what you call society, on the spot and in the instant when the sound
mind in a sound body appeared.  Rich and fine is your dress, O
conservatism! your horses are of the best blood; your roads are well
cut and well paved; your pantry is full of meats and your cellar of
wines, and a very good state and condition are you for gentlemen and
ladies to live under; but every one of these goods steals away a drop
of my blood.  I want the necessity of supplying my own wants.  All
this costly culture of yours is not necessary.  Greatness does not
need it.  Yonder peasant, who sits neglected there in a corner,
carries a whole revolution of man and nature in his head, which shall
be a sacred history to some future ages.  For man is the end of
nature; nothing so easily organizes itself in every part of the
universe as he; no moss, no lichen is so easily born; and he takes
along with him and puts out from himself the whole apparatus of
society and condition _extempore_, as an army encamps in a desert,
and where all was just now blowing sand, creates a white city in an
hour, a government, a market, a place for feasting, for conversation,
and for love.

        These considerations, urged by those whose characters and whose
fortunes are yet to be formed, must needs command the sympathy of all
reasonable persons.  But beside that charity which should make all
adult persons interested for the youth, and engage them to see that
he has a free field and fair play on his entrance into life, we are
bound to see that the society, of which we compose a part, does not
permit the formation or continuance of views and practices injurious
to the honor and welfare of mankind.  The objection to conservatism,
when embodied in a party, is, that in its love of acts, it hates
principles; it lives in the senses, not in truth; it sacrifices to
despair; it goes for availableness in its candidate, not for worth;
and for expediency in its measures, and not for the right.  Under
pretence of allowing for friction, it makes so many additions and
supplements to the machine of society, that it will play smoothly and
softly, but will no longer grind any grist.

        The conservative party in the universe concedes that the
radical would talk sufficiently to the purpose, if we were still in
the garden of Eden; he legislates for man as he ought to be; his
theory is right, but he makes no allowance for friction; and this
omission makes his whole doctrine false.  The idealist retorts, that
the conservative falls into a far more noxious error in the other
extreme.  The conservative assumes sickness as a necessity, and his
social frame is a hospital, his total legislation is for the present
distress, a universe in slippers and flannels, with bib and papspoon,
swallowing pills and herb-tea.  Sickness gets organized as well as
health, the vice as well as the virtue.  Now that a vicious system of
trade has existed so long, it has stereotyped itself in the human
generation, and misers are born.  And now that sickness has got such
a foot-hold, leprosy has grown cunning, has got into the ballot-box;
the lepers outvote the clean; society has resolved itself into a
Hospital Committee, and all its laws are quarantine.  If any man
resist, and set up a foolish hope he has entertained as good against
the general despair, society frowns on him, shuts him out of her
opportunities, her granaries, her refectories, her water and bread,
and will serve him a sexton's turn.  Conservatism takes as low a view
of every part of human action and passion.  Its religion is just as
bad; a lozenge for the sick; a dolorous tune to beguile the
distemper; mitigations of pain by pillows and anodynes; always
mitigations, never remedies; pardons for sin, funeral honors, --
never self-help, renovation, and virtue.  Its social and political
action has no better aim; to keep out wind and weather, to bring the
day and year about, and make the world last our day; not to sit on
the world and steer it; not to sink the memory of the past in the
glory of a new and more excellent creation; a timid cobbler and
patcher, it degrades whatever it touches.  The cause of education is
urged in this country with the utmost earnestness, -- on what ground?
why on this, that the people have the power, and if they are not
instructed to sympathize with the intelligent, reading, trading, and
governing class, inspired with a taste for the same competitions and
prizes, they will upset the fair pageant of Judicature, and perhaps
lay a hand on the sacred muniments of wealth itself, and new
distribute the land.  Religion is taught in the same spirit.  The
contractors who were building a road out of Baltimore, some years
ago, found the Irish laborers quarrelsome and refractory, to a degree
that embarrassed the agents, and seriously interrupted the progress
of the work.  The corporation were advised to call off the police,
and build a Catholic chapel; which they did; the priest presently
restored order, and the work went on prosperously.  Such hints, be
sure, are too valuable to be lost.  If you do not value the Sabbath,
or other religious institutions, give yourself no concern about
maintaining them.  They have already acquired a market value as
conservators of property; and if priest and church-member should
fail, the chambers of commerce and the presidents of the Banks, the
very innholders and landlords of the county would muster with fury to
their support.

 
        Of course, religion in such hands loses its essence.  Instead
of that reliance, which the soul suggests on the eternity of truth
and duty, men are misled into a reliance on institutions, which, the
moment they cease to be the instantaneous creations of the devout
sentiment, are worthless.  Religion among the low becomes low.  As it
loses its truth, it loses credit with the sagacious.  They detect the
falsehood of the preaching, but when they say so, all good citizens
cry, Hush; do not weaken the state, do not take off the strait jacket
from dangerous persons.  Every honest fellow must keep up the hoax
the best he can; must patronize providence and piety, and wherever he
sees anything that will keep men amused, schools or churches or
poetry, or picture-galleries or music, or what not, he must cry
"Hist-a-boy," and urge the game on.  What a compliment we pay to the
good SPIRIT with our superserviceable zeal!

        But not to balance reasons for and against the establishment
any longer, and if it still be asked in this necessity of partial
organization, which party on the whole has the highest claims on our
sympathy?  I bring it home to the private heart, where all such
questions must have their final arbitrement.  How will every strong
and generous mind choose its ground, -- with the defenders of the
old? or with the seekers of the new?  Which is that state which
promises to edify a great, brave, and beneficent man; to throw him on
his resources, and tax the strength of his character?  On which part
will each of us find himself in the hour of health and of aspiration?

        I understand well the respect of mankind for war, because that
breaks up the Chinese stagnation of society, and demonstrates the
personal merits of all men.  A state of war or anarchy, in which law
has little force, is so far valuable, that it puts every man on
trial.  The man of principle is known as such, and even in the fury
of faction is respected.  In the civil wars of France, Montaigne
alone, among all the French gentry, kept his castle gates unbarred,
and made his personal integrity as good at least as a regiment.  The
man of courage and resources is shown, and the effeminate and base
person.  Those who rise above war, and those who fall below it, it
easily discriminates, as well as those, who, accepting its rude
conditions, keep their own head by their own sword.

 
        But in peace and a commercial state we depend, not as we ought,
on our knowledge and all men's knowledge that we are honest men, but
we cowardly lean on the virtue of others.  For it is always at last
the virtue of some men in the society, which keeps the law in any
reverence and power.  Is there not something shameful that I should
owe my peaceful occupancy of my house and field, not to the knowledge
of my countrymen that I am useful, but to their respect for sundry
other reputable persons, I know not whom, whose joint virtues still
keep the law in good odor?

        It will never make any difference to a hero what the laws are.
His greatness will shine and accomplish itself unto the end, whether
they second him or not.  If he have earned his bread by drudgery, and
in the narrow and crooked ways which were all an evil law had left
him, he will make it at least honorable by his expenditure.  Of the
past he will take no heed; for its wrongs he will not hold himself
responsible: he will say, all the meanness of my progenitors shall
not bereave me of the power to make this hour and company fair and
fortunate.  Whatsoever streams of power and commodity flow to me,
shall of me acquire healing virtue, and become fountains of safety.
Cannot I too descend a Redeemer into nature?  Whosoever hereafter
shall name my name, shall not record a malefactor, but a benefactor
in the earth.  If there be power in good intention, in fidelity, and
in toil, the north wind shall be purer, the stars in heaven shall
glow with a kindlier beam, that I have lived.  I am primarily engaged
to myself to be a public servant of all the gods, to demonstrate to
all men that there is intelligence and good will at the heart of
things, and ever higher and yet higher leadings.  These are my
engagements; how can your law further or hinder me in what I shall do
to men?  On the other hand, these dispositions establish their
relations to me.  Wherever there is worth, I shall be greeted.
Wherever there are men, are the objects of my study and love.  Sooner
or later all men will be my friends, and will testify in all methods
the energy of their regard.  I cannot thank your law for my
protection.  I protect it.  It is not in its power to protect me.  It
is my business to make myself revered.  I depend on my honor, my
labor, and my dispositions, for my place in the affections of
mankind, and not on any conventions or parchments of yours.

        But if I allow myself in derelictions, and become idle and
dissolute, I quickly come to love the protection of a strong law,
because I feel no title in myself to my advantages.  To the
intemperate and covetous person no love flows; to him mankind would
pay no rent, no dividend, if force were once relaxed; nay, if they
could give their verdict, they would say, that his self-indulgence
and his oppression deserved punishment from society, and not that
rich board and lodging he now enjoys.  The law acts then as a screen
of his unworthiness, and makes him worse the longer it protects him.

        In conclusion, to return from this alternation of partial
views, to the high platform of universal and necessary history, it is
a happiness for mankind that innovation has got on so far, and has so
free a field before it.  The boldness of the hope men entertain
transcends all former experience.  It calms and cheers them with the
picture of a simple and equal life of truth and piety.  And this hope
flowered on what tree?  It was not imported from the stock of some
celestial plant, but grew here on the wild crab of conservatism.  It
is much that this old and vituperated system of things has borne so
fair a child.  It predicts that amidst a planet peopled with
conservatives, one Reformer may yet be born.
.
        THE CONDUCT OF LIFE
        by Ralph Waldo Emerson

 
        I
 
        FATE
 
        Delicate omens traced in air
        To the lone bard true witness bare;
        Birds with auguries on their wings
        Chanted undeceiving things
        Him to beckon, him to warn;
        Well might then the poet scorn
        To learn of scribe or courier
        Hints writ in vaster character;
        And on his mind, at dawn of day,
        Soft shadows of the evening lay.
        For the prevision is allied
        Unto the thing so signified;
        Or say, the foresight that awaits
        Is the same Genius that creates.
 
 
        _Fate_

        It chanced during one winter, a few years ago, that our cities
wsing the theory of the Age.  By an odd coincidence, four or five
noted men were each reading a discourse to the citizens of Boston or
New York, on the Spirit of the Times.  It so happened that the
subject had the same prominence in some remarkable pamphlets and
journals issued in London in the same season.  To me, however, the
question of the times resolved itself into a practical question of
the conduct of life.  How shall I live?  We are incompetent to solve
the times.  Our geometry cannot span the huge orbits of the
prevailing ideas, behold their return, and reconcile their
opposition.  We can only obey our own polarity.  'Tis fine for us to
speculate and elect our course, if we must accept an irresistible
dictation.

        In our first steps to gain our wishes, we come upon immovable
limitations.  We are fired with the hope to reform men.  After many
experiments, we find that we must begin earlier, -- at school.  But
the boys and girls are not docile; we can make nothing of them.  We
decide that they are not of good stock.  We must begin our reform
earlier still, -- at generation: that is to say, there is Fate, or
laws of the world.

        But if there be irresistible dictation, this dictation
understands itself.  If we must accept Fate, we are not less
compelled to affirm liberty, the significance of the individual, the
grandeur of duty, the power of character.  This is true, and that
other is true.  But our geometry cannot span these extreme points,
and reconcile them.  What to do?  By obeying each thought frankly, by
harping, or, if you will, pounding on each string, we learn at last
its power.  By the same obedience to other thoughts, we learn theirs,
and then comes some reasonable hope of harmonizing them.  We are
sure, that, though we know not how, necessity does comport with
liberty, the individual with the world, my polarity with the spirit
of the times.  The riddle of the age has for each a private solution.
If one would study his own time, it must be by this method of taking
up in turn each of the leading topics which belong to our scheme of
human life, and, by firmly stating all that is agreeable to
experience on one, and doing the same justice to the opposing facts
in the others, the true limitations will appear.  Any excess of
emphasis, on one part, would be corrected, and a just balance would
be made.

        But let us honestly state the facts.  Our America has a bad
name for superficialness.  Great men, great nations, have not been
boasters and buffoons, but perceivers of the terror of life, and have
manned themselves to face it.  The Spartan, embodying his religion in
his country, dies before its majesty without a question.  The Turk,
who believes his doom is written on the iron leaf in the moment when
he entered the world, rushes on the enemy's sabre with undivided
will.  The Turk, the Arab, the Persian, accepts the foreordained
fate.

        "On two days, it steads not to run from thy grave,
                The appointed, and the unappointed day;
        On the first, neither balm nor physician can save,
                Nor thee, on the second, the Universe slay."

        The Hindoo, under the wheel, is as firm.  Our Calvinists, in
the last generation, had something of the same dignity.  They felt
that the weight of the Universe held them down to their place.  What
could _they_ do?  Wise men feel that there is something which cannot
be talked or voted away, -- a strap or belt which girds the world.

        "The Destiny, minister general,
        That executeth in the world o'er all,
        The purveyance which God hath seen beforne,
        So strong it is, that tho' the world had sworn
        The contrary of a thing by yea or nay,
        Yet sometime it shall fallen on a day
        That falleth not oft in a thousand year;
        For, certainly, our appetites here,
        Be it of war, or peace, or hate, or love,
        All this is ruled by the sight above."
                Chaucer: _The Knighte's Tale._

        The Greek Tragedy expressed the same sense: "Whatever is fated,
that will take place.  The great immense mind of Jove is not to be
transgressed."

 
        Savages cling to a local god of one tribe or town.  The broad
ethics of Jesus were quickly narrowed to village theologies, which
preach an election or favoritism.  And, now and then, an amiable
parson, like Jung Stilling, or Robert Huntington, believes in a
pistareen-Providence, which, whenever the good man wants a dinner,
makes that somebody shall knock at his door, and leave a half-dollar.
But Nature is no sentimentalist, -- does not cosset or pamper us.  We
must see that the world is rough and surly, and will not mind
drowning a man or a woman; but swallows your ship like a grain of
dust.  The cold, inconsiderate of persons, tingles your blood,
benumbs your feet, freezes a man like an apple.  The diseases, the
elements, fortune, gravity, lightning, respect no persons.  The way
of Providence is a little rude.  The habit of snake and spider, the
snap of the tiger and other leapers and bloody jumpers, the crackle
of the bones of his prey in the coil of the anaconda, -- these are in
the system, and our habits are like theirs.  You have just dined,
and, however scrupulously the slaughter-house is concealed in the
graceful distance of miles, there is complicity, -- expensive races,
-- race living at the expense of race.  The planet is liable to
shocks from comets, perturbations from planets, rendings from
earthquake and volcano, alterations of climate, precessions of
equinoxes.  Rivers dry up by opening of the forest.  The sea changes
its bed.  Towns and counties fall into it.  At Lisbon, an earthquake
killed men like flies.  At Naples, three years ago, ten thousand
persons were crushed in a few minutes.  The scurvy at sea; the sword
of the climate in the west of Africa, at Cayenne, at Panama, at New
Orleans, cut off men like a massacre.  Our western prairie shakes
with fever and ague.  The cholera, the small-pox, have proved as
mortal to some tribes, as a frost to the crickets, which, having
filled the summer with noise, are silenced by a fall of the
temperature of one night.  Without uncovering what does not concern
us, or counting how many species of parasites hang on a bombyx; or
groping after intestinal parasites, or infusory biters, or the
obscurities of alternate generation; -- the forms of the shark, the
_labrus_, the jaw of the sea-wolf paved with crushing teeth, the
weapons of the grampus, and other warriors hidden in the sea, -- are
hints of ferocity in the interiors of nature.  Let us not deny it up
and down.  Providence has a wild, rough, incalculable road to its
end, and it is of no use to try to whitewash its huge, mixed
instrumentalities, or to dress up that terrific benefactor in a clean
shirt and white neckcloth of a student in divinity.

        Will you say, the disasters which threaten mankind are
exceptional, and one need not lay his account for cataclysms every
day?  Aye, but what happens once, may happen again, and so long as
these strokes are not to be parried by us, they must be feared.

        But these shocks and ruins are less destructive to us, than the
stealthy power of other laws which act on us daily.  An expense of
ends to means is fate; -- organization tyrannizing over character.
The menagerie, or forms and powers of the spine, is a book of fate:
the bill of the bird, the skull of the snake, determines tyrannically
its limits.  So is the scale of races, of temperaments; so is sex; so
is climate; so is the reaction of talents imprisoning the vital power
in certain directions.  Every spirit makes its house; but afterwards
the house confines the spirit.

        The gross lines are legible to the dull: the cabman is
phrenologist so far: he looks in your face to see if his shilling is
sure.  A dome of brow denotes one thing; a pot-belly another; a
squint, a pug-nose, mats of hair, the pigment of the epidermis,
betray character.  People seem sheathed in their tough organization.
Ask Spurzheim, ask the doctors, ask Quetelet, if temperaments decide
nothing? or if there be any-thing they do not decide?  Read the
description in medical books of the four temperaments, and you will
think you are reading your own thoughts which you had not yet told.
Find the part which black eyes, and which blue eyes, play severally
in the company.  How shall a man escape from his ancestors, or draw
off from his veins the black drop which he drew from his father's or
his mother's life?  It often appears in a family, as if all the
qualities of the progenitors were potted in several jars, -- some
ruling quality in each son or daughter of the house, -- and sometimes
the unmixed temperament, the rank unmitigated elixir, the family
vice, is drawn off in a separate individual, and the others are
proportionally relieved.  We sometimes see a change of expression in
our companion, and say, his father, or his mother, comes to the
windows of his eyes, and sometimes a remote relative.  In different
hours, a man represents each of several of his ancestors, as if there
were seven or eight of us rolled up in each man's skin,-- seven or
eight ancestors at least, -- and they constitute the variety of notes
for that new piece of music which his life is.  At the corner of the
street, you read the possibility of each passenger, in the facial
angle, in the complexion, in the depth of his eye.  His parentage
determines it.  Men are what their mothers made them.  You may as
well ask a loom which weaves huckaback, why it does not make
cashmere, as expect poetry from this engineer, or a chemical
discovery from that jobber.  Ask the digger in the ditch to explain
Newton's laws: the fine organs of his brain have been pinched by
overwork and squalid poverty from father to son, for a hundred years.
When each comes forth from his mother's womb, the gate of gifts
closes behind him.  Let him value his hands and feet, he has but one
pair.  So he has but one future, and that is already predetermined in
his lobes, and described in that little fatty face, pig-eye, and
squat form.  All the privilege and all the legislation of the world
cannot meddle or help to make a poet or a prince of him.

        Jesus said, "When he looketh on her, he hath committed
adultery." But he is an adulterer before he has yet looked on the
woman, by the superfluity of animal, and the defect of thought, in
his constitution.  Who meets him, or who meets her, in the street,
sees that they are ripe to be each other's victim.

        In certain men, digestion and sex absorb the vital force, and
the stronger these are, the individual is so much weaker.  The more
of these drones perish, the better for the hive.  If, later, they
give birth to some superior individual, with force enough to add to
this animal a new aim, and a complete apparatus to work it out, all
the ancestors are gladly forgotten.  Most men and most women are
merely one couple more.  Now and then, one has a new cell or
camarilla opened in his brain, -- an architectural, a musical, or a
philological knack, some stray taste or talent for flowers, or
chemistry, or pigments, or story-telling, a good hand for drawing, a
good foot for dancing, an athletic frame for wide journeying, &c.  --
which skill nowise alters rank in the scale of nature, but serves to
pass the time, the life of sensation going on as before.  At last,
these hints and tendencies are fixed in one, or in a succession.
Each absorbs so much food and force, as to become itself a new
centre.  The new talent draws off so rapidly the vital force, that
not enough remains for the animal functions, hardly enough for
health; so that, in the second generation, if the like genius appear,
the health is visibly deteriorated, and the generative force
impaired.

        People are born with the moral or with the material bias; --
uterine brothers with this diverging destination: and I suppose, with
high magnifiers, Mr. Frauenhofer or Dr. Carpenter might come to
distinguish in the embryo at the fourth day, this is a Whig, and that
a Free-soiler.

        It was a poetic attempt to lift this mountain of Fate, to
reconcile this despotism of race with liberty, which led the Hindoos
to say, "Fate is nothing but the deeds committed in a prior state of
existence." I find the coincidence of the extremes of eastern and
western speculation in the daring statement of Schelling, "there is
in every man a certain feeling, that he has been what he is from all
eternity, and by no means became such in time." To say it less
sublimely, -- in the history of the individual is always an account
of his condition, and he knows himself to be a party to his present
estate.

        A good deal of our politics is physiological.  Now and then, a
man of wealth in the heyday of youth adopts the tenet of broadest
freedom.  In England, there is always some man of wealth and large
connection planting himself, during all his years of health, on the
side of progress, who, as soon as he begins to die, checks his
forward play, calls in his troops, and becomes conservative.  All
conservatives are such from personal defects.  They have been
effeminated by position or nature, born halt and blind, through
luxury of their parents, and can only, like invalids, act on the
defensive.  But strong natures, backwoodsmen, New Hampshire giants,
Napoleons, Burkes, Broughams, Websters, Kossuths, are inevitable
patriots, until their life ebbs, and their defects and gout, palsy
and money, warp them.

        The strongest idea incarnates itself in majorities and nations,
in the healthiest and strongest.  Probably, the election goes by
avoirdupois weight, and, if you could weigh bodily the tonnage of any
hundred of the Whig and the Democratic party in a town, on the
Dearborn balance, as they passed the hayscales, you could predict
with certainty which party would carry it.  On the whole, it would be
rather the speediest way of deciding the vote, to put the selectmen
or the mayor and aldermen at the hayscales.

        In science, we have to consider two things: power and
circumstance.  All we know of the egg, from each successive
discovery, is, _another vesicle_; and if, after five hundred years,
you get a better observer, or a better glass, he finds within the
last observed another.  In vegetable and animal tissue, it is just
alike, and all that the primary power or spasm operates, is, still,
vesicles, vesicles.  Yes, -- but the tyrannical Circumstance!  A
vesicle in new circumstances, a vesicle lodged in darkness, Oken
thought, became animal; in light, a plant.  Lodged in the parent
animal, it suffers changes, which end in unsheathing miraculous
capability in the unaltered vesicle, and it unlocks itself to fish,
bird, or quadruped, head and foot, eye and claw.  The Circumstance is
Nature.  Nature is, what you may do.  There is much you may not.  We
have two things, -- the circumstance, and the life.  Once we thought,
positive power was all.  Now we learn, that negative power, or
circumstance, is half.  Nature is the tyrannous circumstance, the
thick skull, the sheathed snake, the ponderous, rock-like jaw;
necessitated activity; violent direction; the conditions of a tool,
like the locomotive, strong enough on its track, but which can do
nothing but mischief off of it; or skates, which are wings on the
ice, but fetters on the ground.

        The book of Nature is the book of Fate.  She turns the gigantic
pages, -- leaf after leaf, -- never returning one.  One leaf she lays
down, a floor of granite; then a thousand ages, and a bed of slate; a
thousand ages, and a measure of coal; a thousand ages, and a layer of
marl and mud: vegetable forms appear; her first misshapen animals,
zoophyte, trilobium, fish; then, saurians, -- rude forms, in which
she has only blocked her future statue, concealing under these
unwieldly monsters the fine type of her coming king.  The face of the
planet cools and dries, the races meliorate, and man is born.  But
when a race has lived its term, it comes no more again.

        The population of the world is a conditional population not the
best, but the best that could live now; and the scale of tribes, and
the steadiness with which victory adheres to one tribe, and defeat to
another, is as uniform as the superposition of strata.  We know in
history what weight belongs to race.  We see the English, French, and
Germans planting themselves on every shore and market of America and
Australia, and monopolizing the commerce of these countries.  We like
the nervous and victorious habit of our own branch of the family.  We
follow the step of the Jew, of the Indian, of the Negro.  We see how
much will has been expended to extinguish the Jew, in vain.  Look at
the unpalatable conclusions of Knox, in his "Fragment of Races," -- a
rash and unsatisfactory writer, but charged with pungent and
unforgetable truths.  "Nature respects race, and not hybrids." "Every
race has its own _habitat_." "Detach a colony from the race, and it
deteriorates to the crab." See the shades of the picture.  The German
and Irish millions, like the Negro, have a great deal of guano in
their destiny.  They are ferried over the Atlantic, and carted over
America, to ditch and to drudge, to make corn cheap, and then to lie
down prematurely to make a spot of green grass on the prairie.

        One more fagot of these adamantine bandages, is, the new
science of Statistics.  It is a rule, that the most casual and
extraordinary events -- if the basis of population is broad enough --
become matter of fixed calculation.  It would not be safe to say when
a captain like Bonaparte, a singer like Jenny Lind, or a navigator
like Bowditch, would be born in Boston: but, on a population of
twenty or two hundred millions, something like accuracy may be had.
(*)

        (*) "Everything which pertains to the human species, considered
as a whole, belongs to the order of physical facts.  The greater the
number of individuals, the more does the influence of the individual
will disappear, leaving predominance to a series of general facts
dependent on causes by which society exists, and is preserved." --
Quetelet.

        'Tis frivolous to fix pedantically the date of particular
inventions.  They have all been invented over and over fifty times.
Man is the arch machine, of which all these shifts drawn from himself
are toy models.  He helps himself on each emergency by copying or
duplicating his own structure, just so far as the need is.  'Tis hard
to find the right Homer Zoroaster, or Menu; harder still to find the
Tubal Cain, or Vulcan, or Cadmus, or Copernicus, or Fust, or Fulton,
the indisputable inventor.  There are scores and centuries of them.
"The air is full of men." This kind of talent so abounds, this
constructive tool-making efficiency, as if it adhered to the chemic
atoms, as if the air he breathes were made of Vaucansons, Franklins,
and Watts.

        Doubtless, in every million there will be an astronomer, a
mathematician, a comic poet, a mystic.  No one can read the history
of astronomy, without perceiving that Copernicus, Newton, Laplace,
are not new men, or a new kind of men, but that Thales, Anaximenes,
Hipparchus, Empedocles, Aristarchus, Pythagoras, ;oEnopides, had
anticipated them; each had the same tense geometrical brain, apt for
the same vigorous computation and logic, a mind parallel to the
movement of the world.  The Roman mile probably rested on a measure
of a degree of the meridian.  Mahometan and Chinese know what we know
of leap-year, of the Gregorian calendar, and of the precession of the
equinoxes.  As, in every barrel of cowries, brought to New Bedford,
there shall be one _orangia_, so there will, in a dozen millions of
Malays and Mahometans, be one or two astronomical skulls.  In a large
city, the most casual things, and things whose beauty lies in their
casualty, are produced as punctually and to order as the baker's
muffin for breakfast.  Punch makes exactly one capital joke a week;
and the journals contrive to furnish one good piece of news every
day.

        And not less work the laws of repression, the penalties of
violated functions.  Famine, typhus, frost, war, suicide, and effete
races, must be reckoned calculable parts of the system of the world.

        These are pebbles from the mountain, hints of the terms by
which our life is walled up, and which show a kind of mechanical
exactness, as of a loom or mill, in what we call casual or fortuitous
events.

        The force with which we resist these torrents of tendency looks
so ridiculously inadequate, that it amounts to little more than a
criticism or a protest made by a minority of one, under compulsion of
millions.  I seemed, in the height of a tempest, to see men overboard
struggling in the waves, and driven about here and there.  They
glanced intelligently at each other, but 'twas little they could do
for one another; 'twas much if each could keep afloat alone.  Well,
they had a right to their eye-beams, and all the rest was Fate.

        We cannot trifle with this reality, this cropping-out in our
planted gardens of the core of the world.  No picture of life can
have any veracity that does not admit the odious facts.  A man's
power is hooped in by a necessity, which, by many experiments, he
touches on every side, until he learns its arc.

        The element running through entire nature, which we popularly
call Fate, is known to us as limitation.  Whatever limits us, we call
Fate.  If we are brute and barbarous, the fate takes a brute and
dreadful shape.  As we refine, our checks become finer.  If we rise
to spiritual culture, the antagonism takes a spiritual form.  In the
Hindoo fables, Vishnu follows Maya through all her ascending changes,
from insect and crawfish up to elephant; whatever form she took, he
took the male form of that kind, until she became at last woman and
goddess, and he a man and a god.  The limitations refine as the soul
purifies, but the ring of necessity is always perched at the top.

        When the gods in the Norse heaven were unable to bind the
Fenris Wolf with steel or with weight of mountains, -- the one he
snapped and the other he spurned with his heel,--they put round his
foot a limp band softer than silk or cobweb, and this held him: the
more he spurned it, the stiffer it drew.  So soft and so stanch is
the ring of Fate.  Neither brandy, nor nectar, nor sulphuric ether,
nor hell-fire, nor ichor, nor poetry, nor genius, can get rid of this
limp band.  For if we give it the high sense in which the poets use
it, even thought itself is not above Fate: that too must act
according to eternal laws, and all that is wilful and fantastic in it
is in opposition to its fundamental essence.

        And, last of all, high over thought, in the world of morals,
Fate appears as vindicator, levelling the high, lifting the low,
requiring justice in man, and always striking soon or late, when
justice is not done.  What is useful will last; what is hurtful will
sink.  "The doer must suffer," said the Greeks: "you would soothe a
Deity not to be soothed." "God himself cannot procure good for the
wicked," said the Welsh triad.  "God may consent, but only for a
time," said the bard of Spain.  The limitation is impassable by any
insight of man.  In its last and loftiest ascensions, insight itself,
and the freedom of the will, is one of its obedient members.  But we
must not run into generalizations too large, but show the natural
bounds or essential distinctions, and seek to do justice to the other
elements as well.

        Thus we trace Fate, in matter, mind, and morals, -- in race, in
retardations of strata, and in thought and character as well.  It is
everywhere bound or limitation.  But Fate has its lord; limitation
its limits; is different seen from above and from below; from within
and from without.  For, though Fate is immense, so is power, which is
the other fact in the dual world, immense.  If Fate follows and
limits power, power attends and antagonizes Fate.  We must respect
Fate as natural history, but there is more than natural history.  For
who and what is this criticism that pries into the matter?  Man is
not order of nature, sack and sack, belly and members, link in a
chain, nor any ignominious baggage, but a stupendous antagonism, a
dragging together of the poles of the Universe.  He betrays his
relation to what is below him, -- thick-skulled, small-brained,
fishy, quadrumanous, -- quadruped ill-disguised, hardly escaped into
biped, and has paid for the new powers by loss of some of the old
ones.  But the lightning which explodes and fashions planets, maker
of planets and suns, is in him.  On one side, elemental order,
sandstone and granite, rock-ledges, peat-bog, forest, sea and shore;
and, on the other part, thought, the spirit which composes and
decomposes nature, -- here they are, side by side, god and devil,
mind and matter, king and conspirator, belt and spasm, riding
peacefully together in the eye and brain of every man.

        Nor can he blink the freewill.  To hazard the contradiction, --
freedom is necessary.  If you please to plant yourself on the side of
Fate, and say, Fate is all; then we say, a part of Fate is the
freedom of man.  Forever wells up the impulse of choosing and acting
in the soul.  Intellect annuls Fate.  So far as a man thinks, he is
free.  And though nothing is more disgusting than the crowing about
liberty by slaves, as most men are, and the flippant mistaking for
freedom of some paper preamble like a "Declaration of Independence,"
or the statute right to vote, by those who have never dared to think
or to act, yet it is wholesome to man to look not at Fate, but the
other way: the practical view is the other.  His sound relation to
these facts is to use and command, not to cringe to them.  "Look not
on nature, for her name is fatal," said the oracle.  The too much
contemplation of these limits induces meanness.  They who talk much
of destiny, their birth-star, &c., are in a lower dangerous plane,
and invite the evils they fear.

        I cited the instinctive and heroic races as proud believers in
Destiny.  They conspire with it; a loving resignation is with the
event.  But the dogma makes a different impression, when it is held
by the weak and lazy.  'Tis weak and vicious people who cast the
blame on Fate.  The right use of Fate is to bring up our conduct to
the loftiness of nature.  Rude and invincible except by themselves
are the elements.  So let man be.  Let him empty his breast of his
windy conceits, and show his lordship by manners and deeds on the
scale of nature.  Let him hold his purpose as with the tug of
gravitation.  No power, no persuasion, no bribe shall make him give
up his point.  A man ought to compare advantageously with a river, an
oak, or a mountain.  He shall have not less the flow, the expansion,
and the resistance of these.

        'Tis the best use of Fate to teach a fatal courage.  Go face
the fire at sea, or the cholera in your friend's house, or the
burglar in your own, or what danger lies in the way of duty, knowing
you are guarded by the cherubim of Destiny.  If you believe in Fate
to your harm, believe it, at least, for your good.

        For, if Fate is so prevailing, man also is part of it, and can
confront fate with fate.  If the Universe have these savage
accidents, our atoms are as savage in resistance.  We should be
crushed by the atmosphere, but for the reaction of the air within the
body.  A tube made of a film of glass can resist the shock of the
ocean, if filled with the same water.  If there be omnipotence in the
stroke, there is omnipotence of recoil.

        1. But Fate against Fate is only parrying and defence: there
are, also, the noble creative forces.  The revelation of Thought
takes man out of servitude into freedom.  We rightly say of
ourselves, we were born, and afterward we were born again, and many
times.  We have successive experiences so important, that the new
forgets the old, and hence the mythology of the seven or the nine
heavens.  The day of days, the great day of the feast of life, is
that in which the inward eye opens to the Unity in things, to the
omnipresence of law; -- sees that what is must be, and ought to be,
or is the best.  This beatitude dips from on high down on us, and we
see.  It is not in us so much as we are in it.  If the air come to
our lungs, we breathe and live; if not, we die.  If the light come to
our eyes, we see; else not.  And if truth come to our mind, we
suddenly expand to its dimensions, as if we grew to worlds.  We are
as lawgivers; we speak for Nature; we prophesy and divine.

        This insight throws us on the party and interest of the
Universe, against all and sundry; against ourselves, as much as
others.  A man speaking from insight affirms of himself what is true
of the mind: seeing its immortality, he says, I am immortal; seeing
its invincibility, he says, I am strong.  It is not in us, but we are
in it.  It is of the maker, not of what is made.  All things are
touched and changed by it.  This uses, and is not used.  It distances
those who share it, from those who share it not.  Those who share it
not are flocks and herds.  It dates from itself; -- not from former
men or better men, -- gospel, or constitution, or college, or custom.
Where it shines, Nature is no longer intrusive, but all things make a
musical or pictorial impression.  The world of men show like a comedy
without laughter: -- populations, interests, government, history; --
'tis all toy figures in a toy house.  It does not overvalue
particular truths.  We hear eagerly every thought and word quoted
from an intellectual man.  But, in his presence, our own mind is
roused to activity, and we forget very fast what he says, much more
interested in the new play of our own thought, than in any thought of
his.  'Tis the majesty into which we have suddenly mounted, the
impersonality, the scorn of egotisms, the sphere of laws, that engage
us.  Once we were stepping a little this way, and a little that way;
now, we are as men in a balloon, and do not think so much of the
point we have left, or the point we would make, as of the liberty and
glory of the way.

        Just as much intellect as you add, so much organic power.  He
who sees through the design, presides over it, and must will that
which must be.  We sit and rule, and, though we sleep, our dream will
come to pass.  Our thought, though it were only an hour old, affirms
an oldest necessity, not to be separated from thought, and not to be
separated from will.  They must always have coexisted.  It apprises
us of its sovereignty and godhead, which refuse to be severed from
it.  It is not mine or thine, but the will of all mind.  It is poured
into the souls of all men, as the soul itself which constitutes them
men.  I know not whether there be, as is alleged, in the upper region
of our atmosphere, a permanent westerly current, which carries with
it all atoms which rise to that height, but I see, that when souls
reach a certain clearness of perception, they accept a knowledge and
motive above selfishness.  A breath of will blows eternally through
the universe of souls in the direction of the Right and Necessary.
It is the air which all intellects inhale and exhale, and it is the
wind which blows the worlds into order and orbit.

        Thought dissolves the material universe, by carrying the mind
up into a sphere where all is plastic.  Of two men, each obeying his
own thought, he whose thought is deepest will be the strongest
character.  Always one man more than another represents the will of
Divine Providence to the period.

        2. If thought makes free, so does the moral sentiment.  The
mixtures of spiritual chemistry refuse to be analyzed.  Yet we can
see that with the perception of truth is joined the desire that it
shall prevail.  That affection is essential to will.  Moreover, when
a strong will appears, it usually results from a certain unity of
organization, as if the whole energy of body and mind flowed in one
direction.  All great force is real and elemental.  There is no
manufacturing a strong will.  There must be a pound to balance a
pound.  Where power is shown in will, it must rest on the universal
force.  Alaric and Bonaparte must believe they rest on a truth, or
their will can be bought or bent.  There is a bribe possible for any
finite will.  But the pure sympathy with universal ends is an
infinite force, and cannot be bribed or bent.  Whoever has had
experience of the moral sentiment cannot choose but believe in
unlimited power.  Each pulse from that heart is an oath from the Most
High.  I know not what the word _sublime_ means, if it be not the
intimations in this infant of a terrific force.  A text of heroism, a
name and anecdote of courage, are not arguments, but sallies of
freedom.  One of these is the verse of the Persian Hafiz, "'Tis
written on the gate of Heaven, `Wo unto him who suffers himself to be
betrayed by Fate!'" Does the reading of history make us fatalists?
What courage does not the opposite opinion show!  A little whim of
will to be free gallantly contending against the universe of
chemistry.

        But insight is not will, nor is affection will.  Perception is
cold, and goodness dies in wishes; as Voltaire said, 'tis the
misfortune of worthy people that they are cowards; _"un des plus
grands malheurs des honnetes gens c'est qu'ils sont des lafaches."_
There must be a fusion of these two to generate the energy of will.
There can be no driving force, except through the conversion of the
man into his will, making him the will, and the will him.  And one
may say boldly, that no man has a right perception of any truth, who
has not been reacted on by it, so as to be ready to be its martyr.

        The one serious and formidable thing in nature is a will.
Society is servile from want of will, and therefore the world wants
saviours and religions.  One way is right to go: the hero sees it,
and moves on that aim, and has the world under him for root and
support.  He is to others as the world.  His approbation is honor;
his dissent, infamy.  The glance of his eye has the force of
sunbeams.  A personal influence towers up in memory only worthy, and
we gladly forget numbers, money, climate, gravitation, and the rest
of Fate.

        We can afford to allow the limitation, if we know it is the
meter of the growing man.  We stand against Fate, as children stand
up against the wall in their father's house, and notch their height
from year to year.  But when the boy grows to man, and is master of
the house, he pulls down that wall, and builds a new and bigger.
'Tis only a question of time.  Every brave youth is in training to
ride and rule this dragon.  His science is to make weapons and wings
of these passions and retarding forces.  Now whether, seeing these
two things, fate and power, we are permitted to believe in unity?
The bulk of mankind believe in two gods.  They are under one dominion
here in the house, as friend and parent, in social circles, in
letters, in art, in love, in religion: but in mechanics, in dealing
with steam and climate, in trade, in politics, they think they come
under another; and that it would be a practical blunder to transfer
the method and way of working of one sphere, into the other.  What
good, honest, generous men at home, will be wolves and foxes on
change!  What pious men in the parlor will vote for what reprobates
at the polls!  To a certain point, they believe themselves the care
of a Providence.  But, in a steamboat, in an epidemic, in war, they
believe a malignant energy rules.

        But relation and connection are not somewhere and sometimes,
but everywhere and always.  The divine order does not stop where
their sight stops.  The friendly power works on the same rules, in
the next farm, and the next planet.  But, where they have not
experience, they run against it, and hurt themselves.  Fate, then, is
a name for facts not yet passed under the fire of thought; -- for
causes which are unpenetrated.

        But every jet of chaos which threatens to exterminate us, is
convertible by intellect into wholesome force.  Fate is unpenetrated
causes.  The water drowns ship and sailor, like a grain of dust.  But
learn to swim, trim your bark, and the wave which drowned it, will be
cloven by it, and carry it, like its own foam, a plume and a power.
The cold is inconsiderate of persons, tingles your blood, freezes a
man like a dew-drop.  But learn to skate, and the ice will give you a
graceful, sweet, and poetic motion.  The cold will brace your limbs
and brain to genius, and make you foremost men of time.  Cold and sea
will train an imperial Saxon race, which nature cannot bear to lose,
and, after cooping it up for a thousand years in yonder England,
gives a hundred Englands, a hundred Mexicos.  All the bloods it shall
absorb and domineer: and more than Mexicos, -- the secrets of water
and steam, the spasms of electricity, the ductility of metals, the
chariot of the air, the ruddered balloon are awaiting you.

 
        The annual slaughter from typhus far exceeds that of war; but
right drainage destroys typhus.  The plague in the sea-service from
scurvy is healed by lemon juice and other diets portable or
procurable: the depopulation by cholera and small-pox is ended by
drainage and vaccination; and every other pest is not less in the
chain of cause and effect, and may be fought off.  And, whilst art
draws out the venom, it commonly extorts some benefit from the
vanquished enemy.  The mischievous torrent is taught to drudge for
man: the wild beasts he makes useful for food, or dress, or labor;
the chemic explosions are controlled like his watch.  These are now
the steeds on which he rides.  Man moves in all modes, by legs of
horses, by wings of wind, by steam, by gas of balloon, by
electricity, and stands on tiptoe threatening to hunt the eagle in
his own element.  There's nothing he will not make his carrier.

        Steam was, till the other day, the devil which we dreaded.
Every pot made by any human potter or brazier had a hole in its
cover, to let off the enemy, lest he should lift pot and roof, and
carry the house away.  But the Marquis of Worcester, Watt, and Fulton
bethought themselves, that, where was power, was not devil, but was
God; that it must be availed of, and not by any means let off and
wasted.  Could he lift pots and roofs and houses so handily? he was
the workman they were in search of.  He could be used to lift away,
chain, and compel other devils, far more reluctant and dangerous,
namely, cubic miles of earth, mountains, weight or resistance of
water, machinery, and the labors of all men in the world; and time he
shall lengthen, and shorten space.

        It has not fared much otherwise with higher kinds of steam.
The opinion of the million was the terror of the world, and it was
attempted, either to dissipate it, by amusing nations, or to pile it
over with strata of society, -- a layer of soldiers; over that, a
layer of lords; and a king on the top; with clamps and hoops of
castles, garrisons, and police.  But, sometimes, the religious
principle would get in, and burst the hoops, and rive every mountain
laid on top of it.  The Fultons and Watts of politics, believing in
unity, saw that it was a power, and, by satisfying it, (as justice
satisfies everybody,) through a different disposition of society, --
grouping it on a level, instead of piling it into a mountain, -- they
have contrived to make of his terror the most harmless and energetic
form of a State.

        Very odious, I confess, are the lessons of Fate.  Who likes to
have a dapper phrenologist pronouncing on his fortunes?  Who likes to
believe that he has hidden in his skull, spine, and pelvis, all the
vices of a Saxon or Celtic race, which will be sure to pull him down,
-- with what grandeur of hope and resolve he is fired, -- into a
selfish, huckstering, servile, dodging animal?  A learned physician
tells us, the fact is invariable with the Neapolitan, that, when
mature, he assumes the forms of the unmistakable scoundrel.  That is
a little overstated, -- but may pass.

        But these are magazines and arsenals.  A man must thank his
defects, and stand in some terror of his talents.  A transcendent
talent draws so largely on his forces, as to lame him; a defect pays
him revenues on the other side.  The sufferance, which is the badge
of the Jew, has made him, in these days, the ruler of the rulers of
the earth.  If Fate is ore and quarry, if evil is good in the making,
if limitation is power that shall be, if calamities, oppositions, and
weights are wings and means, -- we are reconciled.

        Fate involves the melioration.  No statement of the Universe
can have any soundness, which does not admit its ascending effort.
The direction of the whole, and of the parts, is toward benefit, and
in proportion to the health.  Behind every individual, closes
organization: before him, opens liberty, -- the Better, the Best.
The first and worst races are dead.  The second and imperfect races
are dying out, or remain for the maturing of higher.  In the latest
race, in man, every generosity, every new perception, the love and
praise he extorts from his fellows, are certificates of advance out
of fate into freedom.  Liberation of the will from the sheaths and
clogs of organization which he has outgrown, is the end and aim of
this world.  Every calamity is a spur and valuable hint; and where
his endeavors do not yet fully avail, they tell as tendency.  The
whole circle of animal life, -- tooth against tooth, -- devouring
war, war for food, a yelp of pain and a grunt of triumph, until, at
last, the whole menagerie, the whole chemical mass is mellowed and
refined for higher use, -- pleases at a sufficient perspective.

        But to see how fate slides into freedom, and freedom into fate,
observe how far the roots of every creature run, or find, if you can,
a point where there is no thread of connection.  Our life is
consentaneous and far-related.  This knot of nature is so well tied,
that nobody was ever cunning enough to find the two ends.  Nature is
intricate, overlapped, interweaved, and endless.  Christopher Wren
said of the beautiful King's College chapel, "that, if anybody would
tell him where to lay the first stone, he would build such another."
But where shall we find the first atom in this house of man, which is
all consent, inosculation, and balance of parts?

        The web of relation is shown in _habitat_, shown in
hybernation.  When hybernation was observed, it was found, that,
whilst some animals became torpid in winter, others were torpid in
summer: hybernation then was a false name.  The _long sleep_ is not
an effect of cold, but is regulated by the supply of food proper to
the animal.  It becomes torpid when the fruit or prey it lives on is
not in season, and regains its activity when its food is ready.

        Eyes are found in light; ears in auricular air; feet on land;
fins in water; wings in air; and, each creature where it was meant to
be, with a mutual fitness.  Every zone has its own _Fauna_.  There is
adjustment between the animal and its food, its parasite, its enemy.
Balances are kept.  It is not allowed to diminish in numbers, nor to
exceed.  The like adjustments exist for man.  His food is cooked,
when he arrives; his coal in the pit; the house ventilated; the mud
of the deluge dried; his companions arrived at the same hour, and
awaiting him with love, concert, laughter, and tears.  These are
coarse adjustments, but the invisible are not less.  There are more
belongings to every creature than his air and his food.  His
instincts must be met, and he has predisposing power that bends and
fits what is near him to his use.  He is not possible until the
invisible things are right for him, as well as the visible.  Of what
changes, then, in sky and earth, and in finer skies and earths, does
the appearance of some Dante or Columbus apprise us!

        How is this effected?  Nature is no spendthrift, but takes the
shortest way to her ends.  As the general says to his soldiers, "if
you want a fort, build a fort," so nature makes every creature do its
own work and get its living, -- is it planet, animal, or tree.  The
planet makes itself.  The animal cell makes itself; -- then, what it
wants.  Every creature, -- wren or dragon, -- shall make its own
lair.  As soon as there is life, there is self-direction, and
absorbing and using of material.  Life is freedom, -- life in the
direct ratio of its amount.  You may be sure, the new-born man is not
inert.  Life works both voluntarily and supernaturally in its
neighborhood.  Do you suppose, he can be estimated by his weight in
pounds, or, that he is contained in his skin, -- this reaching,
radiating, jaculating fellow?  The smallest candle fills a mile with
its rays, and the papillae of a man run out to every star.

        When there is something to be done, the world knows how to get
it done.  The vegetable eye makes leaf, pericarp, root, bark, or
thorn, as the need is; the first cell converts itself into stomach,
mouth, nose, or nail, according to the want: the world throws its
life into a hero or a shepherd; and puts him where he is wanted.
Dante and Columbus were Italians, in their time: they would be
Russians or Americans to-day.  Things ripen, new men come.  The
adaptation is not capricious.  The ulterior aim, the purpose beyond
itself, the correlation by which planets subside and crystallize,
then animate beasts and men, will not stop, but will work into finer
particulars, and from finer to finest.

        The secret of the world is, the tie between person and event.
Person makes event, and event person.  The "times," "the age," what
is that, but a few profound persons and a few active persons who
epitomize the times?  -- Goethe, Hegel, Metternich, Adams, Calhoun,
Guizot, Peel, Cobden, Kossuth, Rothschild, Astor, Brunel, and the
rest.  The same fitness must be presumed between a man and the time
and event, as between the sexes, or between a race of animals and the
food it eats, or the inferior races it uses.  He thinks his fate
alien, because the copula is hidden.  But the soul contains the event
that shall befall it, for the event is only the actualization of its
thoughts; and what we pray to ourselves for is always granted.  The
event is the print of your form.  It fits you like your skin.  What
each does is proper to him.  Events are the children of his body and
mind.  We learn that the soul of Fate is the soul of us, as Hafiz
sings,

        Alas! till now I had not known,
        My guide and fortune's guide are one.
 
        All the toys that infatuate men, and which they play for, --
houses, land, money, luxury, power, fame, are the selfsame thing,
with a new gauze or two of illusion overlaid.  And of all the drums
and rattles by which men are made willing to have their heads broke,
and are led out solemnly every morning to parade, -- the most
admirable is this by which we are brought to believe that events are
arbitrary, and independent of actions.  At the conjuror's, we detect
the hair by which he moves his puppet, but we have not eyes sharp
enough to descry the thread that ties cause and effect.

        Nature magically suits the man to his fortunes, by making these
the fruit of his character.  Ducks take to the water, eagles to the
sky, waders to the sea margin, hunters to the forest, clerks to
counting-rooms, soldiers to the frontier.  Thus events grow on the
same stem with persons; are sub-persons.  The pleasure of life is
according to the man that lives it, and not according to the work or
the place.  Life is an ecstasy.  We know what madness belongs to
love, -- what power to paint a vile object in hues of heaven.  As
insane persons are indifferent to their dress, diet, and other
accommodations, and, as we do in dreams, with equanimity, the most
absurd acts, so, a drop more of wine in our cup of life will
reconcile us to strange company and work.  Each creature puts forth
from itself its own condition and sphere, as the slug sweats out its
slimy house on the pear-leaf, and the woolly aphides on the apple
perspire their own bed, and the fish its shell.  In youth, we clothe
ourselves with rainbows, and go as brave as the zodiac.  In age, we
put out another sort of perspiration, -- gout, fever, rheumatism,
caprice, doubt, fretting, and avarice.

        A man's fortunes are the fruit of his character.  A man's
friends are his magnetisms.  We go to Herodotus and Plutarch for
examples of Fate; but we are examples.  _"Quisque suos patimur
manes."_ The tendency of every man to enact all that is in his
constitution is expressed in the old belief, that the efforts which
we make to escape from our destiny only serve to lead us into it: and
I have noticed, a man likes better to be complimented on his
position, as the proof of the last or total excellence, than on his
merits.

        A man will see his character emitted in the events that seem to
meet, but which exude from and accompany him.  Events expand with the
character.  As once he found himself among toys, so now he plays a
part in colossal systems, and his growth is declared in his ambition,
his companions, and his performance.  He looks like a piece of luck,
but is a piece of causation; -- the mosaic, angulated and ground to
fit into the gap he fills.  Hence in each town there is some man who
is, in his brain and performance, an explanation of the tillage,
production, factories, banks, churches, ways of living, and society,
of that town.  If you do not chance to meet him, all that you see
will leave you a little puzzled: if you see him, it will become
plain.  We know in Massachusetts who built New Bedford, who built
Lynn, Lowell, Lawrence, Clinton, Fitchburg, Holyoke, Portland, and
many another noisy mart.  Each of these men, if they were
transparent, would seem to you not so much men, as walking cities,
and, wherever you put them, they would build one.

        History is the action and reaction of these two, -- Nature and
Thought; -- two boys pushing each other on the curb-stone of the
pavement.  Everything is pusher or pushed: and matter and mind are in
perpetual tilt and balance, so.  Whilst the man is weak, the earth
takes up him.  He plants his brain and affections.  By and by he will
take up the earth, and have his gardens and vineyards in the
beautiful order and productiveness of his thought.  Every solid in
the universe is ready to become fluid on the approach of the mind,
and the power to flux it is the measure of the mind.  If the wall
remain adamant, it accuses the want of thought.  To a subtler force,
it will stream into new forms, expressive of the character of the
mind.  What is the city in which we sit here, but an aggregate of
incongruous materials, which have obeyed the will of some man?  The
granite was reluctant, but his hands were stronger, and it came.
Iron was deep in the ground, and well combined with stone; but could
not hide from his fires.  Wood, lime, stuffs, fruits, gums, were
dispersed over the earth and sea, in vain.  Here they are, within
reach of every man's day-labor, -- what he wants of them.  The whole
world is the flux of matter over the wires of thought to the poles or
points where it would build.  The races of men rise out of the ground
preoccupied with a thought which rules them, and divided into parties
ready armed and angry to fight for this metaphysical abstraction.
The quality of the thought differences the Egyptian and the Roman,
the Austrian and the American.  The men who come on the stage at one
period are all found to be related to each other.  Certain ideas are
in the air.  We are all impressionable, for we are made of them; all
impressionable, but some more than others, and these first express
them.  This explains the curious contemporaneousness of inventions
and discoveries.  The truth is in the air, and the most
impressionable brain will announce it first, but all will announce it
a few minutes later.  So women, as most susceptible, are the best
index of the coming hour.  So the great man, that is, the man most
imbued with the spirit of the time, is the impressionable man, -- of
a fibre irritable and delicate, like iodine to light.  He feels the
infinitesimal attractions.  His mind is righter than others, because
he yields to a current so feeble as can be felt only by a needle
delicately poised.

        The correlation is shown in defects.  Moller, in his Essay on
Architecture, taught that the building which was fitted accurately to
answer its end, would turn out to be beautiful, though beauty had not
been intended.  I find the like unity in human structures rather
virulent and pervasive; that a crudity in the blood will appear in
the argument; a hump in the shoulder will appear in the speech and
handiwork.  If his mind could be seen, the hump would be seen.  If a
man has a seesaw in his voice, it will run into his sentences, into
his poem, into the structure of his fable, into his speculation, into
his charity.  And, as every man is hunted by his own daemon, vexed by
his own disease, this checks all his activity.

        So each man, like each plant, has his parasites.  A strong,
astringent, bilious nature has more truculent enemies than the slugs
and moths that fret my leaves.  Such an one has curculios, borers,
knife-worms: a swindler ate him first, then a client, then a quack,
then smooth, plausible gentlemen, bitter and selfish as Moloch.

 
        This correlation really existing can be divined.  If the
threads are there, thought can follow and show them.  Especially when
a soul is quick and docile; as Chaucer sings,

        "Or if the soul of proper kind
        Be so perfect as men find,
        That it wot what is to come,
        And that he warneth all and some
        Of every of their aventures,
        By previsions or figures;
        But that our flesh hath not might
        It to understand aright
        For it is warned too darkly." --
 
        Some people are made up of rhyme, coincidence, omen,
periodicity, and presage: they meet the person they seek; what their
companion prepares to say to them, they first say to him; and a
hundred signs apprise them of what is about to befall.

        Wonderful intricacy in the web, wonderful constancy in the
design this vagabond life admits.  We wonder how the fly finds its
mate, and yet year after year we find two men, two women, without
legal or carnal tie, spend a great part of their best time within a
few feet of each other.  And the moral is, that what we seek we shall
find; what we flee from flees from us; as Goethe said, "what we wish
for in youth, comes in heaps on us in old age," too often cursed with
the granting of our prayer: and hence the high caution, that, since
we are sure of having what we wish, we beware to ask only for high
things.

        One key, one solution to the mysteries of human condition, one
solution to the old knots of fate, freedom, and foreknowledge,
exists, the propounding, namely, of the double consciousness.  A man
must ride alternately on the horses of his private and his public
nature, as the equestrians in the circus throw themselves nimbly from
horse to horse, or plant one foot on the back of one, and the other
foot on the back of the other.  So when a man is the victim of his
fate, has sciatica in his loins, and cramp in his mind; a club-foot
and a club in his wit; a sour face, and a selfish temper; a strut in
his gait, and a conceit in his affection; or is ground to powder by
the vice of his race; he is to rally on his relation to the Universe,
which his ruin benefits.  Leaving the daemon who suffers, he is to
take sides with the Deity who secures universal benefit by his pain.

        To offset the drag of temperament and race, which pulls down,
learn this lesson, namely, that by the cunning copresence of two
elements, which is throughout nature, whatever lames or paralyzes
you, draws in with it the divinity, in some form, to repay.  A good
intention clothes itself with sudden power.  When a god wishes to
ride, any chip or pebble will bud and shoot out winged feet, and
serve him for a horse.

        Let us build altars to the Blessed Unity which holds nature and
souls in perfect solution, and compels every atom to serve an
universal end.  I do not wonder at a snow-flake, a shell, a summer
landscape, or the glory of the stars; but at the necessity of beauty
under which the universe lies; that all is and must be pictorial;
that the rainbow, and the curve of the horizon, and the arch of the
blue vault are only results from the organism of the eye.  There is
no need for foolish amateurs to fetch me to admire a garden of
flowers, or a sun-gilt cloud, or a waterfall, when I cannot look
without seeing splendor and grace.  How idle to choose a random
sparkle here or there, when the indwelling necessity plants the rose
of beauty on the brow of chaos, and discloses the central intention
of Nature to be harmony and joy.

        Let us build altars to the Beautiful Necessity.  If we thought
men were free in the sense, that, in a single exception one
fantastical will could prevail over the law of things, it were all
one as if a child's hand could pull down the sun.  If, in the least
particular, one could derange the order of nature, -- who would
accept the gift of life?

        Let us build altars to the Beautiful Necessity, which secures
that all is made of one piece; that plaintiff and defendant, friend
and enemy, animal and planet, food and eater, are of one kind.  In
astronomy, is vast space, but no foreign system; in geology, vast
time, but the same laws as to-day.  Why should we be afraid of
Nature, which is no other than "philosophy and theology embodied"?
Why should we fear to be crushed by savage elements, we who are made
up of the same elements?  Let us build to the Beautiful Necessity,
which makes man brave in believing that he cannot shun a danger that
is appointed, nor incur one that is not; to the Necessity which
rudely or softly educates him to the perception that there are no
contingencies; that Law rules throughout existence, a Law which is
not intelligent but intelligence, -- not personal nor impersonal, --
it disdains words and passes understanding; it dissolves persons; it
vivifies nature; yet solicits the pure in heart to draw on all its
omnipotence.

 
        II
 
        POWER
 
        His tongue was framed to music,
        And his hand was armed with skill,
        His face was the mould of beauty,
        And his heart the throne of will.
 
 
        _Power_

        There is not yet any inventory of a man's faculties, any more
than a bible of his opinions.  Who shall set a limit to the influence
of a human being?  There are men, who, by their sympathetic
attractions, carry nations with them, and lead the activity of the
human race.  And if there be such a tie, that, wherever the mind of
man goes, nature will accompany him, perhaps there are men whose
magnetisms are of that force to draw material and elemental powers,
and, where they appear, immense instrumentalities organize around
them.  Life is a search after power; and this is an element with
which the world is so saturated, -- there is no chink or crevice in
which it is not lodged, -- that no honest seeking goes unrewarded.  A
man should prize events and possessions as the ore in which this fine
mineral is found; and he can well afford to let events and
possessions, and the breath of the body go, if their value has been
added to him in the shape of power.  If he have secured the elixir,
he can spare the wide gardens from which it was distilled.  A
cultivated man, wise to know and bold to perform, is the end to which
nature works, and the education of the will is the flowering and
result of all this geology and astronomy.

        All successful men have agreed in one thing, -- they were
_causationists_.  They believed that things went not by luck, but by
law; that there was not a weak or a cracked link in the chain that
joins the first and last of things.  A belief in causality, or strict
connection between every trifle and the principle of being, and, in
consequence, belief in compensation, or, that nothing is got for
nothing, -- characterizes all valuable minds, and must control every
effort that is made by an industrious one.  The most valiant men are
the best believers in the tension of the laws.  "All the great
captains," said Bonaparte, "have performed vast achievements by
conforming with the rules of the art, -- by adjusting efforts to
obstacles."

        The key to the age may be this, or that, or the other, as the
young orators describe; -- the key to all ages is -- Imbecility;
imbecility in the vast majority of men, at all times, and, even in
heroes, in all but certain eminent moments; victims of gravity,
custom, and fear.  This gives force to the strong, -- that the
multitude have no habit of self-reliance or original action.

        We must reckon success a constitutional trait.  Courage, -- the
old physicians taught, (and their meaning holds, if their physiology
is a little mythical,) -- courage, or the degree of life, is as the
degree of circulation of the blood in the arteries.  "During passion,
anger, fury, trials of strength, wrestling, fighting, a large amount
of blood is collected in the arteries, the maintenance of bodily
strength requiring it, and but little is sent into the veins.  This
condition is constant with intrepid persons." Where the arteries hold
their blood, is courage and adventure possible.  Where they pour it
unrestrained into the veins, the spirit is low and feeble.  For
performance of great mark, it needs extraordinary health.  If Eric is
in robust health, and has slept well, and is at the top of his
condition, and thirty years old, at his departure from Greenland, he
will steer west, and his ships will reach Newfoundland.  But take out
Eric, and put in a stronger and bolder man, -- Biorn, or Thorfin, --
and the ships will, with just as much ease, sail six hundred, one
thousand, fifteen hundred miles further, and reach Labrador and New
England.  There is no chance in results.  With adults, as with
children, one class enter cordially into the game, and whirl with the
whirling world; the others have cold hands, and remain bystanders; or
are only dragged in by the humor and vivacity of those who can carry
a dead weight.  The first wealth is health.  Sickness is
poor-spirited, and cannot serve any one: it must husband its
resources to live.  But health or fulness answers its own ends, and
has to spare, runs over, and inundates the neighborhoods and creeks
of other men's necessities.

        All power is of one kind, a sharing of the nature of the world.
The mind that is parallel with the laws of nature will be in the
current of events, and strong with their strength.  One man is made
of the same stuff of which events are made; is in sympathy with the
course of things; can predict it.  Whatever befalls, befalls him
first; so that he is equal to whatever shall happen.  A man who knows
men, can talk well on politics, trade, law, war, religion.  For,
everywhere, men are led in the same manners.

 
        The advantage of a strong pulse is not to be supplied by any
labor, art, or concert.  It is like the climate, which easily rears a
crop, which no glass, or irrigation, or tillage, or manures, can
elsewhere rival.  It is like the opportunity of a city like New York,
or Constantinople, which needs no diplomacy to force capital or
genius or labor to it.  They come of themselves, as the waters flow
to it.  So a broad, healthy, massive understanding seems to lie on
the shore of unseen rivers, of unseen oceans, which are covered with
barks, that, night and day, are drifted to this point.  That is
poured into its lap, which other men lie plotting for.  It is in
everybody's secret; anticipates everybody's discovery; and if it do
not command every fact of the genius and the scholar, it is because
it is large and sluggish, and does not think them worth the exertion
which you do.

        This affirmative force is in one, and is not in another, as one
horse has the spring in him, and another in the whip.  "On the neck
of the young man," said Hafiz, "sparkles no gem so gracious as
enterprise." Import into any stationary district, as into an old
Dutch population in New York or Pennsylvania, or among the planters
of Virginia, a colony of hardy Yankees, with seething brains, heads
full of steam-hammer, pulley, crank, and toothed wheel, -- and
everything begins to shine with values.  What enhancement to all the
water and land in England, is the arrival of James Watt or Brunel!
In every company, there is not only the active and passive sex, but,
in both men and women, a deeper and more important _sex of mind_,
namely, the inventive or creative class of both men and women, and
the uninventive or accepting class.  Each _plus_ man represents his
set, and, if he have the accidental advantage of personal ascendency,
-- which implies neither more nor less of talent, but merely the
temperamental or taming eye of a soldier or a schoolmaster, (which
one has, and one has not, as one has a black moustache and one a
blond,) then quite easily and without envy or resistance, all his
coadjutors and feeders will admit his right to absorb them.  The
merchant works by book-keeper and cashier; the lawyer's authorities
are hunted up by clerks; the geologist reports the surveys of his
subalterns; Commander Wilkes appropriates the results of all the
naturalists attached to the Expedition; Thorwaldsen's statue is
finished by stone-cutters; Dumas has journeymen; and Shakspeare was
theatre-manager, and used the labor of many young men, as well as the
playbooks.

        There is always room for a man of force, and he makes room for
many.  Society is a troop of thinkers, and the best heads among them
take the best places.  A feeble man can see the farms that are fenced
and tilled, the houses that are built.  The strong man sees the
possible houses and farms.  His eye makes estates, as fast as the sun
breeds clouds.

        When a new boy comes into school, when a man travels, and
encounters strangers every day, or, when into any old club a new
comer is domesticated, that happens which befalls, when a strange ox
is driven into a pen or pasture where cattle are kept; there is at
once a trial of strength between the best pair of horns and the new
comer, and it is settled thenceforth which is the leader.  So now,
there is a measuring of strength, very courteous, but decisive, and
an acquiescence thenceforward when these two meet.  Each reads his
fate in the other's eyes.  The weaker party finds, that none of his
information or wit quite fits the occasion.  He thought he knew this
or that: he finds that he omitted to learn the end of it.  Nothing
that he knows will quite hit the mark, whilst all the rival's arrows
are good, and well thrown.  But if he knew all the facts in the
encyclopaedia, it would not help him: for this is an affair of
presence of mind, of attitude, of aplomb: the opponent has the sun
and wind, and, in every cast, the choice of weapon and mark; and,
when he himself is matched with some other antagonist, his own shafts
fly well and hit.  'Tis a question of stomach and constitution.  The
second man is as good as the first, -- perhaps better; but has not
stoutness or stomach, as the first has, and so his wit seems
over-fine or under-fine.

        Health is good, -- power, life, that resists disease, poison,
and all enemies, and is conservative, as well as creative.  Here is
question, every spring, whether to graft with wax, or whether with
clay; whether to whitewash or to potash, or to prune; but the one
point is the thrifty tree.  A good tree, that agrees with the soil,
will grow in spite of blight, or bug, or pruning, or neglect, by
night and by day, in all weathers and all treatments.  Vivacity,
leadership, must be had, and we are not allowed to be nice in
choosing.  We must fetch the pump with dirty water, if clean cannot
be had.  If we will make bread, we must have contagion, yeast,
emptyings, or what not, to induce fermentation into the dough: as the
torpid artist seeks inspiration at any cost, by virtue or by vice, by
friend or by fiend, by prayer or by wine.  And we have a certain
instinct, that where is great amount of life, though gross and
peccant, it has its own checks and purifications, and will be found
at last in harmony with moral laws.

        We watch in children with pathetic interest, the degree in
which they possess recuperative force.  When they are hurt by us, or
by each other, or go to the bottom of the class, or miss the annual
prizes, or are beaten in the game, -- if they lose heart, and
remember the mischance in their chamber at home, they have a serious
check.  But if they have the buoyancy and resistance that preoccupies
them with new interest in the new moment, -- the wounds cicatrize,
and the fibre is the tougher for the hurt.

        One comes to value this _plus_ health, when he sees that all
difficulties vanish before it.  A timid man listening to the
alarmists in Congress, and in the newspapers, and observing the
profligacy of party, -- sectional interests urged with a fury which
shuts its eyes to consequences, with a mind made up to desperate
extremities, ballot in one hand, and rifle in the other, -- might
easily believe that he and his country have seen their best days, and
he hardens himself the best he can against the coming ruin.  But,
after this has been foretold with equal confidence fifty times, and
government six per cents have not declined a quarter of a mill, he
discovers that the enormous elements of strength which are here in
play, make our politics unimportant.  Personal power, freedom, and
the resources of nature strain every faculty of every citizen.  We
prosper with such vigor, that, like thrifty trees, which grow in
spite of ice, lice, mice, and borers, so we do not suffer from the
profligate swarms that fatten on the national treasury.  The huge
animals nourish huge parasites, and the rancor of the disease attests
the strength of the constitution.  The same energy in the Greek
_Demos_ drew the remark, that the evils of popular government appear
greater than they are; there is compensation for them in the spirit
and energy it awakens.  The rough and ready style which belongs to a
people of sailors, foresters, farmers, and mechanics, has its
advantages.  Power educates the potentate.  As long as our people
quote English standards they dwarf their own proportions.  A Western
lawyer of eminence said to me he wished it were a penal offence to
bring an English law-book into a court in this country, so pernicious
had he found in his experience our deference to English precedent.
The very word `commerce' has only an English meaning, and is pinched
to the cramp exigencies of English experience.  The commerce of
rivers, the commerce of railroads, and who knows but the commerce of
air-balloons, must add an American extension to the pond-hole of
admiralty.  As long as our people quote English standards, they will
miss the sovereignty of power; but let these rough riders, --
legislators in shirt-sleeves, -- Hoosier, Sucker, Wolverine, Badger,
-- or whatever hard head Arkansas, Oregon, or Utah sends, half
orator, half assassin, to represent its wrath and cupidity at
Washington, -- let these drive as they may; and the disposition of
territories and public lands, the necessity of balancing and keeping
at bay the snarling majorities of German, Irish, and of native
millions, will bestow promptness, address, and reason, at last, on
our buffalo-hunter, and authority and majesty of manners.  The
instinct of the people is right.  Men expect from good whigs, put
into office by the respectability of the country, much less skill to
deal with Mexico, Spain, Britain, or with our own malcontent members,
than from some strong transgressor, like Jefferson, or Jackson, who
first conquers his own government, and then uses the same genius to
conquer the foreigner.  The senators who dissented from Mr. Polk's
Mexican war, were not those who knew better, but those who, from
political position, could afford it; not Webster, but Benton and
Calhoun.

        This power, to be sure, is not clothed in satin.  'Tis the
power of Lynch law, of soldiers and pirates; and it bullies the
peaceable and loyal.  But it brings its own antidote; and here is my
point, -- that all kinds of power usually emerge at the same time;
good energy, and bad; power of mind, with physical health; the
ecstasies of devotion, with the exasperations of debauchery.  The
same elements are always present, only sometimes these conspicuous,
and sometimes those; what was yesterday foreground, being to-day
background, -- what was surface, playing now a not less effective
part as basis.  The longer the drought lasts, the more is the
atmosphere surcharged with water.  The faster the ball falls to the
sun, the force to fly off is by so much augmented.  And, in morals,
wild liberty breeds iron conscience; natures with great impulses have
great resources, and return from far.  In politics, the sons of
democrats will be whigs; whilst red republicanism, in the father, is
a spasm of nature to engender an intolerable tyrant in the next age.
On the other hand, conservatism, ever more timorous and narrow,
disgusts the children, and drives them for a mouthful of fresh air
into radicalism.

        Those who have most of this coarse energy, -- the `bruisers,'
who have run the gauntlet of caucus and tavern through the county or
the state, have their own vices, but they have the good nature of
strength and courage.  Fierce and unscrupulous, they are usually
frank and direct, and above falsehood.  Our politics fall into bad
hands, and churchmen and men of refinement, it seems agreed, are not
fit persons to send to Congress.  Politics is a deleterious
profession, like some poisonous handicrafts.  Men in power have no
opinions, but may be had cheap for any opinion, for any purpose, --
and if it be only a question between the most civil and the most
forcible, I lean to the last.  These Hoosiers and Suckers are really
better than the snivelling opposition.  Their wrath is at least of a
bold and manly cast.  They see, against the unanimous declarations of
the people, how much crime the people will bear; they proceed from
step to step, and they have calculated but too justly upon their
Excellencies, the New England governors, and upon their Honors, the
New England legislators.  The messages of the governors and the
resolutions of the legislatures, are a proverb for expressing a sham
virtuous indignation, which, in the course of events, is sure to be
belied.

        In trade, also, this energy usually carries a trace of
ferocity.  Philanthropic and religious bodies do not commonly make
their executive officers out of saints.  The communities hitherto
founded by Socialists, -- the Jesuits, the Port-Royalists, the
American communities at New Harmony, at Brook Farm, at Zoar, are only
possible, by installing Judas as steward.  The rest of the offices
may be filled by good burgesses.  The pious and charitable proprietor
has a foreman not quite so pious and charitable.  The most amiable of
country gentlemen has a certain pleasure in the teeth of the bull-dog
which guards his orchard.  Of the Shaker society, it was formerly a
sort of proverb in the country, that they always sent the devil to
market.  And in representations of the Deity, painting, poetry, and
popular religion have ever drawn the wrath from Hell.  It is an
esoteric doctrine of society, that a little wickedness is good to
make muscle; as if conscience were not good for hands and legs, as if
poor decayed formalists of law and order cannot run like wild goats,
wolves, and conies; that, as there is a use in medicine for poisons,
so the world cannot move without rogues; that public spirit and the
ready hand are as well found among the malignants.  'Tis not very
rare, the coincidence of sharp private and political practice, with
public spirit, and good neighborhood.

        I knew a burly Boniface who for many years kept a public-house
in one of our rural capitals.  He was a knave whom the town could ill
spare.  He was a social, vascular creature, grasping and selfish.
There was no crime which he did not or could not commit.  But he made
good friends of the selectmen, served them with his best chop, when
they supped at his house, and also with his honor the Judge, he was
very cordial, grasping his hand.  He introduced all the fiends, male
and female, into the town, and united in his person the functions of
bully, incendiary, swindler, barkeeper, and burglar.  He girdled the
trees, and cut off the horses' tails of the temperance people, in the
night.  He led the `rummies' and radicals in town-meeting with a
speech.  Meantime, he was civil, fat, and easy, in his house, and
precisely the most public-spirited citizen.  He was active in getting
the roads repaired and planted with shade-trees; he subscribed for
the fountains, the gas, and the telegraph; he introduced the new
horse-rake, the new scraper, the baby-jumper, and what not, that
Connecticut sends to the admiring citizens.  He did this the easier,
that the peddler stopped at his house, and paid his keeping, by
setting up his new trap on the landlord's premises.

        Whilst thus the energy for originating and executing work,
deforms itself by excess, and so our axe chops off our own fingers,
-- this evil is not without remedy.  All the elements whose aid man
calls in, will sometimes become his masters, especially those of most
subtle force.  Shall he, then, renounce steam, fire, and electricity,
or, shall he learn to deal with them?  The rule for this whole class
of agencies is, -- all _plus_ is good; only put it in the right
place.

        Men of this surcharge of arterial blood cannot live on nuts,
herb-tea, and elegies; cannot read novels, and play whist; cannot
satisfy all their wants at the Thursday Lecture, or the Boston
Athenaeum.  They pine for adventure, and must go to Pike's Peak; had
rather die by the hatchet of a Pawnee, than sit all day and every day
at a counting-room desk.  They are made for war, for the sea, for
mining, hunting, and clearing; for hair-breadth adventures, huge
risks, and the joy of eventful living.  Some men cannot endure an
hour of calm at sea.  I remember a poor Malay cook, on board a
Liverpool packet, who, when the wind blew a gale, could not contain
his joy; "Blow!" he cried, "me do tell you, blow!" Their friends and
governors must see that some vent for their explosive complexion is
provided.  The roisters who are destined for infamy at home, if sent
to Mexico, will "cover you with glory," and come back heroes and
generals.  There are Oregons, Californias, and Exploring Expeditions
enough appertaining to America, to find them in files to gnaw, and in
crocodiles to eat.  The young English are fine animals, full of
blood, and when they have no wars to breathe their riotous valors in,
they seek for travels as dangerous as war, diving into Maelstroms;
swimming Hellesponts; wading up the snowy Himmaleh; hunting lion,
rhinoceros, elephant, in South Africa; gypsying with Borrow in Spain
and Algiers; riding alligators in South America with Waterton;
utilizing Bedouin, Sheik, and Pacha, with Layard; yachting among the
icebergs of Lancaster Sound; peeping into craters on the equator; or
running on the creases of Malays in Borneo.

        The excess of virility has the same importance in general
history, as in private and industrial life.  Strong race or strong
individual rests at last on natural forces, which are best in the
savage, who, like the beasts around him, is still in reception of the
milk from the teats of Nature.  Cut off the connection between any of
our works, and this aboriginal source, and the work is shallow.  The
people lean on this, and the mob is not quite so bad an argument as
we sometimes say, for it has this good side.  "March without the
people," said a French deputy from the tribune, "and you march into
night: their instincts are a finger-pointing of Providence, always
turned toward real benefit.  But when you espouse an Orleans party,
or a Bourbon, or a Montalembert party, or any other but an organic
party, though you mean well, you have a personality instead of a
principle, which will inevitably drag you into a corner."

        The best anecdotes of this force are to be had from savage
life, in explorers, soldiers, and buccaneers.  But who cares for
fallings-out of assassins, and fights of bears, or grindings of
icebergs?  Physical force has no value, where there is nothing else.
Snow in snow-banks, fire in volcanoes and solfataras is cheap.  The
luxury of ice is in tropical countries, and midsummer days.  The
luxury of fire is, to have a little on our hearth: and of
electricity, not volleys of the charged cloud, but the manageable
stream on the battery-wires.  So of spirit, or energy; the rests or
remains of it in the civil and moral man, are worth all the cannibals
in the Pacific.

        In history, the great moment is, when the savage is just
ceasing to be a savage, with all his hairy Pelasgic strength directed
on his opening sense of beauty: -- and you have Pericles and Phidias,
-- not yet passed over into the Corinthian civility.  Everything good
in nature and the world is in that moment of transition, when the
swarthy juices still flow plentifully from nature, but their
astringency or acridity is got out by ethics and humanity.

        The triumphs of peace have been in some proximity to war.
Whilst the hand was still familiar with the sword-hilt, whilst the
habits of the camp were still visible in the port and complexion of
the gentleman, his intellectual power culminated: the compression and
tension of these stern conditions is a training for the finest and
softest arts, and can rarely be compensated in tranquil times, except
by some analogous vigor drawn from occupations as hardy as war.

        We say that success is constitutional; depends on a _plus_
condition of mind and body, on power of work, on courage; that it is
of main efficacy in carrying on the world, and, though rarely found
in the right state for an article of commerce, but oftener in the
supersaturate or excess, which makes it dangerous and destructive,
yet it cannot be spared, and must be had in that form, and absorbents
provided to take off its edge.

        The affirmative class monopolize the homage of mankind.  They
originate and execute all the great feats.  What a force was coiled
up in the skull of Napoleon!  Of the sixty thousand men making his
army at Eylau, it seems some thirty thousand were thieves and
burglars.  The men whom, in peaceful communities, we hold if we can,
with iron at their legs, in prisons, under the muskets of sentinels,
this man dealt with, hand to hand, dragged them to their duty, and
won his victories by their bayonets.

        This aboriginal might gives a surprising pleasure when it
appears under conditions of supreme refinement, as in the proficients
in high art.  When Michel Angelo was forced to paint the Sistine
Chapel in fresco, of which art he knew nothing, he went down into the
Pope's gardens behind the Vatican, and with a shovel dug out ochres,
red and yellow, mixed them with glue and water with his own hands,
and having, after many trials, at last suited himself, climbed his
ladders, and painted away, week after week, month after month, the
sibyls and prophets.  He surpassed his successors in rough vigor, as
much as in purity of intellect and refinement.  He was not crushed by
his one picture left unfinished at last.  Michel was wont to draw his
figures first in skeleton, then to clothe them with flesh, and lastly
to drape them.  "Ah!" said a brave painter to me, thinking on these
things, "if a man has failed, you will find he has dreamed instead of
working.  There is no way to success in our art, but to take off your
coat, grind paint, and work like a digger on the railroad, all day
and every day."

        Success goes thus invariably with a certain _plus_ or positive
power: an ounce of power must balance an ounce of weight.  And,
though a man cannot return into his mother's womb, and be born with
new amounts of vivacity, yet there are two economies, which are the
best _succedanea_ which the case admits.  The first is, the stopping
off decisively our miscellaneous activity, and concentrating our
force on one or a few points; as the gardener, by severe pruning,
forces the sap of the tree into one or two vigorous limbs, instead of
suffering it to spindle into a sheaf of twigs.

 
        "Enlarge not thy destiny," said the oracle: "endeavor not to do
more than is given thee in charge." The one prudence in life is
concentration; the one evil is dissipation: and it makes no
difference whether our dissipations are coarse or fine; property and
its cares, friends, and a social habit, or politics, or music, or
feasting.  Everything is good which takes away one plaything and
delusion more, and drives us home to add one stroke of faithful work.
Friends, books, pictures, lower duties, talents, flatteries, hopes,
-- all are distractions which cause oscillations in our giddy
balloon, and make a good poise and a straight course impossible.  You
must elect your work; you shall take what your brain can, and drop
all the rest.  Only so, can that amount of vital force accumulate,
which can make the step from knowing to doing.  No matter how much
faculty of idle seeing a man has, the step from knowing to doing is
rarely taken.  'Tis a step out of a chalk circle of imbecility into
fruitfulness.  Many an artist lacking this, lacks all: he sees the
masculine Angelo or Cellini with despair.  He, too, is up to Nature
and the First Cause in his thought.  But the spasm to collect and
swing his whole being into one act, he has not.  The poet Campbell
said, that "a man accustomed to work was equal to any achievement he
resolved on, and, that, for himself, necessity not inspiration was
the prompter of his muse."

        Concentration is the secret of strength in politics, in war, in
trade, in short, in all management of human affairs.  One of the high
anecdotes of the world is the reply of Newton to the inquiry, "how he
had been able to achieve his discoveries?" -- "By always intending my
mind." Or if you will have a text from politics, take this from
Plutarch: "There was, in the whole city, but one street in which
Pericles was ever seen, the street which led to the market-place and
the council house.  He declined all invitations to banquets, and all
gay assemblies and company.  During the whole period of his
administration, he never dined at the table of a friend." Or if we
seek an example from trade, -- "I hope," said a good man to
Rothyschild, "your children are not too fond of money and business: I
am sure you would not wish that." -- "I am sure I should wish that: I
wish them to give mind, soul, heart, and body to business, -- that is
the way to be happy.  It requires a great deal of boldness and a
great deal of caution, to make a great fortune, and when you have got
it, it requires ten times as much wit to keep it.  If I were to
listen to all the projects proposed to me, I should ruin myself very
soon.  Stick to one business, young man.  Stick to your brewery, (he
said this to young Buxton,) and you will be the great brewer of
London.  Be brewer, and banker, and merchant, and manufacturer, and
you will soon be in the Gazette."

        Many men are knowing, many are apprehensive and tenacious, but
they do not rush to a decision.  But in our flowing affairs a
decision must be made, -- the best, if you can; but any is better
than none.  There are twenty ways of going to a point, and one is the
shortest; but set out at once on one.  A man who has that presence of
mind which can bring to him on the instant all he knows, is worth for
action a dozen men who know as much, but can only bring it to light
slowly.  The good Speaker in the House is not the man who knows the
theory of parliamentary tactics, but the man who decides off-hand.
The good judge is not he who does hair-splitting justice to every
allegation, but who, aiming at substantial justice, rules something
intelligible for the guidance of suitors.  The good lawyer is not the
man who has an eye to every side and angle of contingency, and
qualifies all his qualifications, but who throws himself on your part
so heartily, that he can get you out of a scrape.  Dr. Johnson said,
in one of his flowing sentences, "Miserable beyond all names of
wretchedness is that unhappy pair, who are doomed to reduce
beforehand to the principles of abstract reason all the details of
each domestic day.  There are cases where little can be said, and
much must be done."

        The second substitute for temperament is drill, the power of
use and routine.  The hack is a better roadster than the Arab barb.
In chemistry, the galvanic stream, slow, but continuous, is equal in
power to the electric spark, and is, in our arts, a better agent.  So
in human action, against the spasm of energy, we offset the
continuity of drill.  We spread the same amount of force over much
time, instead of condensing it into a moment.  'Tis the same ounce of
gold here in a ball, and there in a leaf.  At West Point, Col.
Buford, the chief engineer, pounded with a hammer on the trunnions of
a cannon, until he broke them off.  He fired a piece of ordnance some
hundred times in swift succession, until it burst.  Now which stroke
broke the trunnion?  Every stroke.  Which blast burst the piece?
Every blast.  _"Diligence passe sens,"_ Henry VIII.  was wont to say,
or, great is drill.  John Kemble said, that the worst provincial
company of actors would go through a play better than the best
amateur company.  Basil Hall likes to show that the worst regular
troops will beat the best volunteers.  Practice is nine tenths.  A
course of mobs is good practice for orators.  All the great speakers
were bad speakers at first.  Stumping it through England for seven
years, made Cobden a consummate debater.  Stumping it through New
England for twice seven, trained Wendell Phillips.  The way to learn
German, is, to read the same dozen pages over and over a hundred
times, till you know every word and particle in them, and can
pronounce and repeat them by heart.  No genius can recite a ballad at
first reading, so well as mediocrity can at the fifteenth or
twentieth readying.  The rule for hospitality and Irish `help,' is,
to have the same dinner every day throughout the year.  At last, Mrs.
O'Shaughnessy learns to cook it to a nicety, the host learns to carve
it, and the guests are well served.  A humorous friend of mine
thinks, that the reason why Nature is so perfect in her art, and gets
up such inconceivably fine sunsets, is, that she has learned how, at
last, by dint of doing the same thing so very often.  Cannot one
converse better on a topic on which he has experience, than on one
which is new?  Men whose opinion is valued on 'Change, are only such
as have a special experience, and off that ground their opinion is
not valuable.  "More are made good by exercitation, than by nature,"
said Democritus.  The friction in nature is so enormous that we
cannot spare any power.  It is not question to express our thought,
to elect our way, but to overcome resistances of the medium and
material in everything we do.  Hence the use of drill, and the
worthlessness of amateurs to cope with practitioners.  Six hours
every day at the piano, only to give facility of touch; six hours a
day at painting, only to give command of the odious materials, oil,
ochres, and brushes.  The masters say, that they know a master in
music, only by seeing the pose of the hands on the keys; -- so
difficult and vital an act is the command of the instrument.  To have
learned the use of the tools, by thousands of manipulations; to have
learned the arts of reckoning, by endless adding and dividing, is the
power of the mechanic and the clerk.

        I remarked in England, in confirmation of a frequent experience
at home, that, in literary circles, the men of trust and
consideration, bookmakers, editors, university deans and professors,
bishops, too, were by no means men of the largest literary talent,
but usually of a low and ordinary intellectuality, with a sort of
mercantile activity and working talent.  Indifferent hacks and
mediocrities tower, by pushing their forces to a lucrative point, or
by working power, over multitudes of superior men, in Old as in New
England.

        I have not forgotten that there are sublime considerations
which limit the value of talent and superficial success.  We can
easily overpraise the vulgar hero.  There are sources on which we
have not drawn.  I know what I abstain from.  I adjourn what I have
to say on this topic to the chapters on Culture and Worship.  But
this force or spirit, being the means relied on by Nature for
bringing the work of the day about, -- as far as we attach importance
to household life, and the prizes of the world, we must respect that.
And I hold, that an economy may be applied to it; it is as much a
subject of exact law and arithmetic as fluids and gases are; it may
be husbanded, or wasted; every man is efficient only as he is a
container or vessel of this force, and never was any signal act or
achievement in history, but by this expenditure.  This is not gold,
but the gold-maker; not the fame, but the exploit.

        If these forces and this husbandry are within reach of our
will, and the laws of them can be read, we infer that all success,
and all conceivable benefit for man, is also, first or last, within
his reach, and has its own sublime economies by which it may be
attained.  The world is mathematical, and has no casualty, in all its
vast and flowing curve.  Success has no more eccentricity, than the
gingham and muslin we weave in our mills.  I know no more affecting
lesson to our busy, plotting New England brains, than to go into one
of the factories with which we have lined all the watercourses in the
States.  A man hardly knows how much he is a machine, until he begins
to make telegraph, loom, press, and locomotive, in his own image.
But in these, he is forced to leave out his follies and hindrances,
so that when we go to the mill, the machine is more moral than we.
Let a man dare go to a loom, and see if he be equal to it.  Let
machine confront machine, and see how they come out.  The world-mill
is more complex than the calico-mill, and the architect stooped less.
In the gingham-mill, a broken thread or a shred spoils the web
through a piece of a hundred yards, and is traced back to the girl
that wove it, and lessens her wages.  The stockholder, on being shown
this, rubs his hands with delight.  Are you so cunning, Mr.
Profitloss, and do you expect to swindle your master and employer, in
the web you weave?  A day is a more magnificent cloth than any
muslin, the mechanism that makes it is infinitely cunninger, and you
shall not conceal the sleezy, fraudulent, rotten hours you have
slipped into the piece, nor fear that any honest thread, or
straighter steel, or more inflexible shaft, will not testify in the
web.

 
 
 
        III
 
        WEALTH
 
 
        Who shall tell what did befall,
        Far away in time, when once,
        Over the lifeless ball,
        Hung idle stars and suns?
        What god the element obeyed?
        Wings of what wind the lichen bore,
        Wafting the puny seeds of power,
        Which, lodged in rock, the rock abrade?
        And well the primal pioneer
        Knew the strong task to it assigned
        Patient through Heaven's enormous year
        To build in matter home for mind.
        From air the creeping centuries drew
        The matted thicket low and wide,
        This must the leaves of ages strew
        The granite slab to clothe and hide,
        Ere wheat can wave its golden pride.
        What smiths, and in what furnace, rolled
        (In dizzy aeons dim and mute
        The reeling brain can ill compute)
        Copper and iron, lead, and gold?
        What oldest star the fame can save
        Of races perishing to pave
        The planet with a floor of lime?
        Dust is their pyramid and mole:
        Who saw what ferns and palms were pressed
        Under the tumbling mountain's breast, |P988
        In the safe herbal of the coal?
        But when the quarried means were piled,
        All is waste and worthless, till
        Arrives the wise selecting will,
        And, out of slime and chaos, Wit
        Draws the threads of fair and fit.
        Then temples rose, and towns, and marts,
        The shop of toil, the hall of arts;
        Then flew the sail across the seas
        To feed the North from tropic trees;
        The storm-wind wove, the torrent span,
        Where they were bid the rivers ran;
        New slaves fulfilled the poet's dream,
        Galvanic wire, strong-shouldered steam.
        Then docks were built, and crops were stored,
        And ingots added to the hoard.
        But, though light-headed man forget,
        Remembering Matter pays her debt:
        Still, through her motes and masses, draw
        Electric thrills and ties of Law,
        Which bind the strengths of Nature wild
        To the conscience of a child.

 
        _Wealth_
 
        As soon as a stranger is introduced into any compations which
all wish to have answered, is, How does that man get his living?  And
with reason.  He is no whole man until he knows how to earn a
blameless livelihood.  Society is barbarous, until every industrious
man can get his living without dishonest customs.

        Every man is a consumer, and ought to be a producer.  He fails
to make his place good in the world, unless he not only pays his
debt, but also adds something to the common wealth.  Nor can he do
justice to his genius, without making some larger demand on the world
than a bare subsistence.  He is by constitution expensive, and needs
to be rich.

        Wealth has its source in applications of the mind to nature,
from the rudest strokes of spade and axe, up to the last secrets of
art.  Intimate ties subsist between thought and all production;
because a better order is equivalent to vast amounts of brute labor.
The forces and the resistances are Nature's, but the mind acts in
bringing things from where they abound to where they are wanted; in
wise combining; in directing the practice of the useful arts, and in
the creation of finer values, by fine art, by eloquence, by song, or
the reproductions of memory.  Wealth is in applications of mind to
nature; and the art of getting rich consists not in industry, much
less in saving, but in a better order, in timeliness, in being at the
right spot.  One man has stronger arms, or longer legs; another sees
by the course of streams, and growth of markets, where land will be
wanted, makes a clearing to the river, goes to sleep, wakes up rich.
Steam is no stronger now, than it was a hundred years ago; but is put
to better use.  A clever fellow was acquainted with the expansive
force of steam; he also saw the wealth of wheat and grass rotting in
Michigan.  Then he cunningly screws on the steam-pipe to the
wheat-crop.  Puff now, O Steam!  The steam puffs and expands as
before, but this time it is dragging all Michigan at its back to
hungry New York and hungry England.  Coal lay in ledges under the
ground since the Flood, until a laborer with pick and windlass brings
it to the surface.  We may well call it black diamonds.  Every basket
is power and civilization.  For coal is a portable climate.  It
carries the heat of the tropics to Labrador and the polar circle: and
it is the means of transporting itself whithersoever it is wanted.
Watt and Stephenson whispered in the ear of mankind their secret,
that _a half-ounce of coal will draw two tons a mile_, and coal
carries coal, by rail and by boat, to make Canada as warm as
Calcutta, and with its comfort brings its industrial power.

        When the farmer's peaches are taken from under the tree, and
carried into town, they have a new look, and a hundredfold value over
the fruit which grew on the same bough, and lies fulsomely on the
ground.  The craft of the merchant is this bringing a thing from
where it abounds, to where it is costly.

        Wealth begins in a tight roof that keeps the rain and wind out;
in a good pump that yields you plenty of sweet water; in two suits of
clothes, so to change your dress when you are wet; in dry sticks to
burn; in a good double-wick lamp; and three meals; in a horse, or a
locomotive, to cross the land; in a boat to cross the sea; in tools
to work with; in books to read; and so, in giving, on all sides, by
tools and auxiliaries, the greatest possible extension to our powers,
as if it added feet, and hands, and eyes, and blood, length to the
day, and knowledge, and good-will.

        Wealth begins with these articles of necessity.  And here we
must recite the iron law which Nature thunders in these northern
climates.  First, she requires that each man should feed himself.
If, happily, his fathers have left him no inheritance, he must go to
work, and by making his wants less, or his gains more, he must draw
himself out of that state of pain and insult in which she forces the
beggar to lie.  She gives him no rest until this is done: she
starves, taunts, and torments him, takes away warmth, laughter,
sleep, friends, and daylight, until he has fought his way to his own
loaf.  Then, less peremptorily, but still with sting enough, she
urges him to the acquisition of such things as belong to him.  Every
warehouse and shop-window, every fruit-tree, every thought of every
hour, opens a new want to him, which it concerns his power and
dignity to gratify.  It is of no use to argue the wants down: the
philosophers have laid the greatness of man in making his wants few;
but will a man content himself with a hut and a handful of dried
pease?  He is born to be rich.  He is thoroughly related; and is
tempted out by his appetites and fancies to the conquest of this and
that piece of nature, until he finds his well-being in the use of his
planet, and of more planets than his own.  Wealth requires, besides
the crust of bread and the roof, -- the freedom of the city, the
freedom of the earth, travelling, machinery, the benefits of science,
music, and fine arts, the best culture, and the best company.  He is
the rich man who can avail himself of all men's faculties.  He is the
richest man who knows how to draw a benefit from the labors of the
greatest number of men, of men in distant countries, and in past
times.  The same correspondence that is between thirst in the
stomach, and water in the spring, exists between the whole of man and
the whole of nature.  The elements offer their service to him.  The
sea, washing the equator and the poles, offers its perilous aid, and
the power and empire that follow it, -- day by day to his craft and
audacity.  "Beware of me," it says, "but if you can hold me, I am the
key to all the lands." Fire offers, on its side, an equal power.
Fire, steam, lightning, gravity, ledges of rock, mines of iron, lead,
quicksilver, tin, and gold; forests of all woods; fruits of all
climates; animals of all habits; the powers of tillage; the fabrics
of his chemic laboratory; the webs of his loom; the masculine draught
of his locomotive, the talismans of the machine-shop; all grand and
subtile things, minerals, gases, ethers, passions, war, trade,
government, are his natural playmates, and, according to the
excellence of the machinery in each human being, is his attraction
for the instruments he is to employ.  The world is his tool-chest,
and he is successful, or his education is carried on just so far, as
is the marriage of his faculties with nature, or, the degree in which
he takes up things into himself.

        The strong race is strong on these terms.  The Saxons are the
merchants of the world; now, for a thousand years, the leading race,
and by nothing more than their quality of personal independence, and,
in its special modification, pecuniary independence.  No reliance for
bread and games on the government, no clanship, no patriarchal style
of living by the revenues of a chief, no marrying-on, -- no system of
clientship suits them; but every man must pay his scot.  The English
are prosperous and peaceable, with their habit of considering that
every man must take care of himself, and has himself to thank, if he
do not maintain and improve his position in society.

        The subject of economy mixes itself with morals, inasmuch as it
is a peremptory point of virtue that a man's independence be secured.
Poverty demoralizes.  A man in debt is so far a slave; and
Wall-street thinks it easy for a _millionaire_ to be a man of his
word, a man of honor, but, that, in failing circumstances, no man can
be relied on to keep his integrity.  And when one observes in the
hotels and palaces of our Atlantic capitals, the habit of expense,
the riot of the senses, the absence of bonds, clanship,
fellow-feeling of any kind, he feels, that, when a man or a woman is
driven to the wall, the chances of integrity are frightfully
diminished, as if virtue were coming to be a luxury which few could
afford, or, as Burke said, "at a market almost too high for
humanity." He may fix his inventory of necessities and of enjoyments
on what scale he pleases, but if he wishes the power and privilege of
thought, the chalking out his own career, and having society on his
own terms, he must bring his wants within his proper power to
satisfy.

        The manly part is to do with might and main what you can do.
The world is full of fops who never did anything, and who have
persuaded beauties and men of genius to wear their fop livery, and
these will deliver the fop opinion, that it is not respectable to be
seen earning a living; that it is much more respectable to spend
without earning; and this doctrine of the snake will come also from
the elect sons of light; for wise men are not wise at all hours, and
will speak five times from their taste or their humor, to once from
their reason.  The brave workman, who might betray his feeling of it
in his manners, if he do not succumb in his practice, must replace
the grace or elegance forfeited, by the merit of the work done.  No
matter whether he make shoes, or statues, or laws.  It is the
privilege of any human work which is well done to invest the doer
with a certain haughtiness.  He can well afford not to conciliate,
whose faithful work will answer for him.  The mechanic at his bench
carries a quiet heart and assured manners, and deals on even terms
with men of any condition.  The artist has made his picture so true,
that it disconcerts criticism.  The statue is so beautiful, that it
contracts no stain from the market, but makes the market a silent
gallery for itself.  The case of the young lawyer was pitiful to
disgust, -- a paltry matter of buttons or tweezer-cases; but the
determined youth saw in it an aperture to insert his dangerous
wedges, made the insignificance of the thing forgotten, and gave fame
by his sense and energy to the name and affairs of the Tittleton
snuffbox factory.

        Society in large towns is babyish, and wealth is made a toy.
The life of pleasure is so ostentatious, that a shallow observer must
believe that this is the agreed best use of wealth, and, whatever is
pretended, it ends in cosseting.  But, if this were the main use of
surplus capital, it would bring us to barricades, burned towns, and
tomahawks, presently.  Men of sense esteem wealth to be the
assimilation of nature to themselves, the converting of the sap and
juices of the planet to the incarnation and nutriment of their
design.  Power is what they want, -- not candy; -- power to execute
their design, power to give legs and feet, form and actuality to
their thought, which, to a clear-sighted man, appears the end for
which the Universe exists, and all its resources might be well
applied.  Columbus thinks that the sphere is a problem for practical
navigation, as well as for closet geometry, and looks on all kings
and peoples as cowardly landsmen, until they dare fit him out.  Few
men on the planet have more truly belonged to it.  But he was forced
to leave much of his map blank.  His successors inherited his map,
and inherited his fury to complete it.

        So the men of the mine, telegraph, mill, map, and survey,-- the
monomaniacs, who talk up their project in marts, and offices, and
entreat men to subscribe: -- how did our factories get built? how did
North America get netted with iron rails, except by the importunity
of these orators, who dragged all the prudent men in?  Is party the
madness of many for the gain of a few?  This _speculative_ genius is
the madness of few for the gain of the world.  The projectors are
sacrificed, but the public is the gainer.  Each of these idealists,
working after his thought, would make it tyrannical, if he could.  He
is met and antagonized by other speculators, as hot as he.  The
equilibrium is preserved by these counteractions, as one tree keeps
down another in the forest, that it may not absorb all the sap in the
ground.  And the supply in nature of railroad presidents,
copper-miners, grand-junctioners, smoke-burners, fire-annihilators,
&c., is limited by the same law which keeps the proportion in the
supply of carbon, of alum, and of hydrogen.

        To be rich is to have a ticket of admission to the master-works
and chief men of each race.  It is to have the sea, by voyaging; to
visit the mountains, Niagara, the Nile, the desert, Rome, Paris,
Constantinople; to see galleries, libraries, arsenals, manufactories.
The reader of Humboldt's "Cosmos" follows the marches of a man whose
eyes, ears, and mind are armed by all the science, arts, and
implements which mankind have anywhere accumulated, and who is using
these to add to the stock.  So is it with Denon, Beckford, Belzoni,
Wilkinson, Layard, Kane, Lepsius, and Livingston.  "The rich man,"
says Saadi, "is everywhere expected and at home." The rich take up
something more of the world into man's life.  They include the
country as well as the town, the ocean-side, the White Hills, the Far
West, and the old European homesteads of man, in their notion of
available material.  The world is his, who has money to go over it.
He arrives at the sea-shore, and a sumptuous ship has floored and
carpeted for him the stormy Atlantic, and made it a luxurious hotel,
amid the horrors of tempests.  The Persians say, "'Tis the same to
him who wears a shoe, as if the whole earth were covered with
leather."

        Kings are said to have long arms, but every man should have
long arms, and should pluck his living, his instruments, his power,
and his knowing, from the sun, moon, and stars.  Is not then the
demand to be rich legitimate?  Yet, I have never seen a rich man.  I
have never seen a man as rich as all men ought to be, or, with an
adequate command of nature.  The pulpit and the press have many
commonplaces denouncing the thirst for wealth; but if men should take
these moralists at their word, and leave off aiming to be rich, the
moralists would rush to rekindle at all hazards this love of power in
the people, lest civilization should be undone.  Men are urged by
their ideas to acquire the command over nature.  Ages derive a
culture from the wealth of Roman Caesars, Leo Tenths, magnificent
Kings of France, Grand Dukes of Tuscany, Dukes of Devonshire,
Townleys, Vernons, and Peels, in England; or whatever great
proprietors.  It is the interest of all men, that there should be
Vaticans and Louvres full of noble works of art; British Museums, and
French Gardens of Plants, Philadelphia Academies of Natural History,
Bodleian, Ambrosian, Royal, Congressional Libraries.  It is the
interest of all that there should be Exploring Expeditions; Captain
Cooks to voyage round the world, Rosses, Franklins, Richardsons, and
Kanes, to find the magnetic and the geographic poles.  We are all
richer for the measurement of a degree of latitude on the earth's
surface.  Our navigation is safer for the chart.  How intimately our
knowledge of the system of the Universe rests on that!  -- and a true
economy in a state or an individual will forget its frugality in
behalf of claims like these.

        Whilst it is each man's interest, that, not only ease and
convenience of living, but also wealth or surplus product should
exist somewhere, it need not be in his hands.  Often it is very
undesirable to him.  Goethe said well, "nobody should be rich but
those who understand it." Some men are born to own, and can animate
all their possessions.  Others cannot: their owning is not graceful;
seems to be a compromise of their character: they seem to steal their
own dividends.  They should own who can administer; not they who
hoard and conceal; not they who, the greater proprietors they are,
are only the greater beggars, but they whose work carves out work for
more, opens a path for all.  For he is the rich man in whom the
people are rich, and he is the poor man in whom the people are poor:
and how to give all access to the masterpieces of art and nature, is
the problem of civilization.  The socialism of our day has done good
service in setting men on thinking how certain civilizing benefits,
now only enjoyed by the opulent, can be enjoyed by all.  For example,
the providing to each man the means and apparatus of science, and of
the arts.  There are many articles good for occasional use, which few
men are able to own.  Every man wishes to see the ring of Saturn, the
satellites and belts of Jupiter and Mars; the mountains and craters
in the moon: yet how few can buy a telescope! and of those, scarcely
one would like the trouble of keeping it in order, and exhibiting it.
So of electrical and chemical apparatus, and many the like things.
Every man may have occasion to consult books which he does not care
to possess, such as cyclopaedias, dictionaries, tables, charts, maps,
and public documents: pictures also of birds, beasts, fishes, shells,
trees, flowers, whose names he desires to know.

        There is a refining influence from the arts of Design on a
prepared mind, which is as positive as that of music, and not to be
supplied from any other source.  But pictures, engravings, statues,
and casts, beside their first cost, entail expenses, as of galleries
and keepers for the exhibition; and the use which any man can make of
them is rare, and their value, too, is much enhanced by the numbers
of men who can share their enjoyment.  In the Greek cities, it was
reckoned profane, that any person should pretend a property in a work
of art, which belonged to all who could behold it.  I think
sometimes, -- could I only have music on my own terms; -- could I
live in a great city, and know where I could go whenever I wished the
ablution and inundation of musical waves, -- that were a bath and a
medicine.

        If properties of this kind were owned by states, towns, and
lyceums, they would draw the bonds of neighborhood closer.  A town
would exist to an intellectual purpose.  In Europe, where the feudal
forms secure the permanence of wealth in certain families, those
families buy and preserve these things, and lay them open to the
public.  But in America, where democratic institutions divide every
estate into small portions, after a few years, the public should step
into the place of these proprietors, and provide this culture and
inspiration for the citizen.

        Man was born to be rich, or, inevitably grows rich by the use
of his faculties; by the union of thought with nature.  Property is
an intellectual production.  The game requires coolness, right
reasoning, promptness, and patience in the players.  Cultivated labor
drives out brute labor.  An infinite number of shrewd men, in
infinite years, have arrived at certain best and shortest ways of
doing, and this accumulated skill in arts, cultures, harvestings,
curings, manufactures, navigations, exchanges, constitutes the worth
of our world to-day.

        Commerce is a game of skill, which every man cannot play, which
few men can play well.  The right merchant is one who has the just
average of faculties we call _common sense_; a man of a strong
affinity for facts, who makes up his decision on what he has seen.
He is thoroughly persuaded of the truths of arithmetic.  There is
always a reason, _in the man_, for his good or bad fortune, and so,
in making money.  Men talk as if there were some magic about this,
and believe in magic, in all parts of life.  He knows, that all goes
on the old road, pound for pound, cent for cent, -- for every effect
a perfect cause, -- and that good luck is another name for tenacity
of purpose.  He insures himself in every transaction, and likes small
and sure gains.  Probity and closeness to the facts are the basis,
but the masters of the art add a certain long arithmetic.  The
problem is, to combine many and remote operations, with the accuracy
and adherence to the facts, which is easy in near and small
transactions; so to arrive at gigantic results, without any
compromise of safety.  Napoleon was fond of telling the story of the
Marseilles banker, who said to his visitor, surprised at the contrast
between the splendor of the banker's chateau and hospitality, and the
meanness of the counting-room in which he had seen him, -- "Young
man, you are too young to understand how masses are formed, -- the
true and only power, -- whether composed of money, water, or men, it
is all alike, -- a mass is an immense centre of motion, but it must
be begun, it must be kept up:" -- and he might have added, that the
way in which it must be begun and kept up, is, by obedience to the
law of particles.

        Success consists in close appliance to the laws of the world,
and, since those laws are intellectual and moral, an intellectual and
moral obedience.  Political Economy is as good a book wherein to read
the life of man, and the ascendency of laws over all private and
hostile influences, as any Bible which has come down to us.

        Money is representative, and follows the nature and fortunes of
the owner.  The coin is a delicate meter of civil, social, and moral
changes.  The farmer is covetous of his dollar, and with reason.  It
is no waif to him.  He knows how many strokes of labor it represents.
His bones ache with the day's work that earned it.  He knows how much
land it represents; -- how much rain, frost, and sunshine.  He knows
that, in the dollar, he gives you so much discretion and patience so
much hoeing, and threshing.  Try to lift his dollar; you must lift
all that weight.  In the city, where money follows the skit of a pen,
or a lucky rise in exchange, it comes to be looked on as light.  I
wish the farmer held it dearer, and would spend it only for real
bread; force for force.

        The farmer's dollar is heavy, and the clerk's is light and
nimble; leaps out of his pocket; jumps on to cards and faro-tables:
but still more curious is its susceptibility to metaphysical changes.
It is the finest barometer of social storms, and announces
revolutions.

        Every step of civil advancement makes every man's dollar worth
more.  In California, the country where it grew, -- what would it
buy?  A few years since, it would buy a shanty, dysentery, hunger,
bad company, and crime.  There are wide countries, like Siberia,
where it would buy little else to-day, than some petty mitigation of
suffering.  In Rome, it will buy beauty and magnificence.  Forty
years ago, a dollar would not buy much in Boston.  Now it will buy a
great deal more in our old town, thanks to railroads, telegraphs,
steamers, and the contemporaneous growth of New York, and the whole
country.  Yet there are many goods appertaining to a capital city,
which are not yet purchasable here, no, not with a mountain of
dollars.  A dollar in Florida is not worth a dollar in Massachusetts.
A dollar is not value, but representative of value, and, at last, of
moral values.  A dollar is rated for the corn it will buy, or to
speak strictly, not for the corn or house-room, but for Athenian
corn, and Roman house-room, -- for the wit, probity, and power, which
we eat bread and dwell in houses to share and exert.  Wealth is
mental; wealth is moral.  The value of a dollar is, to buy just
things: a dollar goes on increasing in value with all the genius, and
all the virtue of the world.  A dollar in a university, is worth more
than a dollar in a jail; in a temperate, schooled, law-abiding
community, than in some sink of crime, where dice, knives, and
arsenic, are in constant play.

        The "Bank-Note Detector" is a useful publication.  But the
current dollar, silver or paper, is itself the detector of the right
and wrong where it circulates.  Is it not instantly enhanced by the
increase of equity?  If a trader refuses to sell his vote, or adheres
to some odious right, he makes so much more equity in Massachusetts;
and every acre in the State is more worth, in the hour of his action.
If you take out of State-street the ten honestest merchants, and put
in ten roguish persons, controlling the same amount of capital, --
the rates of insurance will indicate it; the soundness of banks will
show it: the highways will be less secure: the schools will feel it;
the children will bring home their little dose of the poison: the
judge will sit less firmly on the bench, and his decisions be less
upright; he has lost so much support and constraint, -- which all
need; and the pulpit will betray it, in a laxer rule of life.  An
apple-tree, if you take out every day for a number of days, a load of
loam, and put in a load of sand about its roots, -- will find it out.
An apple-tree is a stupid kind of creature, but if this treatment be
pursued for a short time, I think it would begin to mistrust
something.  And if you should take out of the powerful class engaged
in trade a hundred good men, and put in a hundred bad, or, what is
just the same thing, introduce a demoralizing institution, would not
the dollar, which is not much stupider than an apple-tree, presently
find it out?  The value of a dollar is social, as it is created by
society.  Every man who removes into this city, with any purchasable
talent or skill in him, gives to every man's labor in the city, a new
worth.  If a talent is anywhere born into the world, the community of
nations is enriched; and, much more, with a new degree of probity.
The expense of crime, one of the principal charges of every nation,
is so far stopped.  In Europe, crime is observed to increase or abate
with the price of bread.  If the Rothschilds at Paris do not accept
bills, the people at Manchester, at Paisley, at Birmingham, are
forced into the highway, and landlords are shot down in Ireland.  The
police records attest it.  The vibrations are presently felt in New
York, New Orleans, and Chicago.  Not much otherwise, the economical
power touches the masses through the political lords.  Rothschild
refuses the Russian loan, and there is peace, and the harvests are
saved.  He takes it, and there is war, and an agitation through a
large portion of mankind, with every hideous result, ending in
revolution, and a new order.

        Wealth brings with it its own checks and balances.  The basis
of political economy is non-interference.  The only safe rule is
found in the self-adjusting meter of demand and supply.  Do not
legislate.  Meddle, and you snap the sinews with your sumptuary laws.
Give no bounties: make equal laws: secure life and property, and you
need not give alms.  Open the doors of opportunity to talent and
virtue, and they will do themselves justice, and property will not be
in bad hands.  In a free and just commonwealth, property rushes from
the idle and imbecile, to the industrious, brave, and persevering.

        The laws of nature play through trade, as a toy-battery
exhibits the effects of electricity.  The level of the sea is not
more surely kept, than is the equilibrium of value in society, by the
demand and supply: and artifice or legislation punishes itself, by
reactions, gluts, and bankruptcies.  The sublime laws play
indifferently through atoms and galaxies.  Whoever knows what happens
in the getting and spending of a loaf of bread and a pint of beer;
that no wishing will change the rigorous limits of pints and penny
loaves; that, for all that is consumed, so much less remains in the
basket and pot; but what is gone out of these is not wasted, but well
spent, if it nourish his body, and enable him to finish his task; --
knows all of political economy that the budgets of empires can teach
him.  The interest of petty economy is this symbolization of the
great economy; the way in which a house, and a private man's methods,
tally with the solar system, and the laws of give and take,
throughout nature; and, however wary we are of the falsehoods and
petty tricks which we suicidally play off on each other, every man
has a certain satisfaction, whenever his dealing touches on the
inevitable facts; when he sees that things themselves dictate the
price, as they always tend to do, and, in large manufactures, are
seen to do.  Your paper is not fine or coarse enough, -- is too
heavy, or too thin.  The manufacturer says, he will furnish you with
just that thickness or thinness you want; the pattern is quite
indifferent to him; here is his schedule; -- any variety of paper, as
cheaper or dearer, with the prices annexed.  A pound of paper costs
so much, and you may have it made up in any pattern you fancy.

        There is in all our dealings a self-regulation that supersedes
chaffering.  You will rent a house, but must have it cheap.  The
owner can reduce the rent, but so he incapacitates himself from
making proper repairs, and the tenant gets not the house he would
have, but a worse one; besides, that a relation a little injurious is
established between land-lord and tenant.  You dismiss your laborer,
saying, "Patrick, I shall send for you as soon as I cannot do without
you." Patrick goes off contented, for he knows that the weeds will
grow with the potatoes, the vines must be planted, next week, and,
however unwilling you may be, the cantelopes, crook-necks, and
cucumbers will send for him.  Who but must wish that all labor and
value should stand on the same simple and surly market?  If it is the
best of its kind, it will.  We must have joiner, locksmith, planter,
priest, poet, doctor, cook, weaver, ostler; each in turn, through the
year.

        If a St. Michael's pear sells for a shilling, it costs a
shilling to raise it.  If, in Boston, the best securities offer
twelve _per cent_.  for money, they have just six _per cent_.  of
insecurity.  You may not see that the fine pear costs you a shilling,
but it costs the community so much.  The shilling represents the
number of enemies the pear has, and the amount of risk in ripening
it.  The price of coal shows the narrowness of the coal-field, and a
compulsory confinement of the miners to a certain district.  All
salaries are reckoned on contingent, as well as on actual services.
"If the wind were always southwest by west," said the skipper, "women
might take ships to sea." One might say, that all things are of one
price; that nothing is cheap or dear; and that the apparent
disparities that strike us, are only a shopman's trick of concealing
the damage in your bargain.  A youth coming into the city from his
native New Hampshire farm, with its hard fare still fresh in his
remembrance, boards at a first-class hotel, and believes he must
somehow have outwitted Dr. Franklin and Malthus, for luxuries are
cheap.  But he pays for the one convenience of a better dinner, by
the loss of some of the richest social and educational advantages.
He has lost what guards! what incentives!  He will perhaps find by
and by, that he left the Muses at the door of the hotel, and found
the Furies inside.  Money often costs too much, and power and
pleasure are not cheap.  The ancient poet said, "the gods sell all
things at a fair price."

        There is an example of the compensations in the commercial
history of this country.  When the European wars threw the
carrying-trade of the world, from 1800 to 1812, into American
bottoms, a seizure was now and then made of an American ship.  Of
course, the loss was serious to the owner, but the country was
indemnified; for we charged threepence a pound for carrying cotton,
sixpence for tobacco, and so on; which paid for the risk and loss,
and brought into the country an immense prosperity, early marriages,
private wealth, the building of cities, and of states: and, after the
war was over, we received compensation over and above, by treaty, for
all the seizures.  Well, the Americans grew rich and great.  But the
pay-day comes round.  Britain, France, and Germany, which our
extraordinary profits had impoverished, send out, attracted by the
fame of our advantages, first their thousands, then their millions,
of poor people, to share the crop.  At first, we employ them, and
increase our prosperity: but, in the artificial system of society and
of protected labor, which we also have adopted and enlarged, there
come presently checks and stoppages.  Then we refuse to employ these
poor men.  But they will not so be answered.  They go into the poor
rates, and, though we refuse wages, we must now pay the same amount
in the form of taxes.  Again, it turns out that the largest
proportion of crimes are committed by foreigners.  The cost of the
crime, and the expense of courts, and of prisons, we must bear, and
the standing army of preventive police we must pay.  The cost of
education of the posterity of this great colony, I will not compute.
But the gross amount of these costs will begin to pay back what we
thought was a net gain from our transatlantic customers of 1800.  It
is vain to refuse this payment.  We cannot get rid of these people,
and we cannot get rid of their will to be supported.  That has become
an inevitable element of our politics; and, for their votes, each of
the dominant parties courts and assists them to get it executed.
Moreover, we have to pay, not what would have contented them at home,
but what they have learned to think necessary here; so that opinion,
fancy, and all manner of moral considerations complicate the problem.

        There are a few measures of economy which will bear to be named
without disgust; for the subject is tender, and we may easily have
too much of it; and therein resembles the hideous animalcules of
which our bodies are built up, -- which, offensive in the particular,
yet compose valuable and effective masses.  Our nature and genius
force us to respect ends, whilst we use means.  We must use the
means, and yet, in our most accurate using, somehow screen and cloak
them, as we can only give them any beauty, by a reflection of the
glory of the end.  That is the good head, which serves the end, and
commands the means.  The rabble are corrupted by their means: the
means are too strong for them, and they desert their end.

        1. The first of these measures is that each man's expense must
proceed from his character.  As long as your genius buys, the
investment is safe, though you spend like a monarch.  Nature arms
each man with some faculty which enables him to do easily some feat
impossible to any other, and thus makes him necessary to society.
This native determination guides his labor and his spending.  He
wants an equipment of means and tools proper to his talent.  And to
save on this point, were to neutralize the special strength and
helpfulness of each mind.  Do your work, respecting the excellence of
the work, and not its acceptableness.  This is so much economy, that,
rightly read, it is the sum of economy.  Profligacy consists not in
spending years of time or chests of money, -- but in spending them
off the line of your career.  The crime which bankrupts men and
states, is, job-work; -- declining from your main design, to serve a
turn here or there.  Nothing is beneath you, if it is in the
direction of your life: nothing is great or desirable, if it is off
from that.  I think we are entitled here to draw a straight line, and
say, that society can never prosper, but must always be bankrupt,
until every man does that which he was created to do.

        Spend for your expense, and retrench the expense which is not
yours.  Allston, the painter, was wont to say, that he built a plain
house, and filled it with plain furniture, because he would hold out
no bribe to any to visit him, who had not similar tastes to his own.
We are sympathetic, and, like children, want everything we see.  But
it is a large stride to independence,-- when a man, in the discovery
of his proper talent, has sunk the necessity for false expenses.  As
the betrothed maiden, by one secure affection, is relieved from a
system of slaveries, -- the daily inculcated necessity of pleasing
all, -- so the man who has found what he can do, can spend on that,
and leave all other spending.  Montaigne said, "When he was a younger
brother, he went brave in dress and equipage, but afterward his
chateau and farms might answer for him." Let a man who belongs to the
class of nobles, those, namely, who have found out that they can do
something, relieve himself of all vague squandering on objects not
his.  Let the realist not mind appearances.  Let him delegate to
others the costly courtesies and decorations of social life.  The
virtues are economists, but some of the vices are also.  Thus, next
to humility, I have noticed that pride is a pretty good husband.  A
good pride is, as I reckon it, worth from five hundred to fifteen
hundred a year.  Pride is handsome, economical: pride eradicates so
many vices, letting none subsist but itself, that it seems as if it
were a great gain to exchange vanity for pride.  Pride can go without
domestics, without fine clothes, can live in a house with two rooms,
can eat potato, purslain, beans, lyed corn, can work on the soil, can
travel afoot, can talk with poor men, or sit silent well-contented in
fine saloons.  But vanity costs money, labor, horses, men, women,
health, and peace, and is still nothing at last, a long way leading
nowhere.  -- Only one drawback; proud people are intolerably selfish,
and the vain are gentle and giving.

        Art is a jealous mistress, and, if a man have a genius for
painting, poetry, music, architecture, or philosophy, he makes a bad
husband, and an ill provider, and should be wise in season, and not
fetter himself with duties which will embitter his days, and spoil
him for his proper work.  We had in this region, twenty years ago,
among our educated men, a sort of Arcadian fanaticism, a passionate
desire to go upon the land, and unite farming to intellectual
pursuits.  Many effected their purpose, and made the experiment, and
some became downright ploughmen; but all were cured of their faith
that scholarship and practical farming, (I mean, with one's own
hands,) could be united.

        With brow bent, with firm intent, the pale scholar leaves his
desk to draw a freer breath, and get a juster statement of his
thought, in the garden-walk.  He stoops to pull up a purslain, or a
dock, that is choking the young corn, and finds there are two: close
behind the last, is a third; he reaches out his hand to a fourth;
behind that, are four thousand and one.  He is heated and untuned,
and, by and by, wakes up from his idiot dream of chickweed and
red-root, to remember his morning thought, and to find, that, with
his adamantine purposes, he has been duped by a dandelion.  A garden
is like those pernicious machineries we read of, every month, in the
newspapers, which catch a man's coat-skirt or his hand, and draw in
his arm, his leg, and his whole body to irresistible destruction.  In
an evil hour he pulled down his wall, and added a field to his
homestead.  No land is bad, but land is worse.  If a man own land,
the land owns him.  Now let him leave home, if he dare.  Every tree
and graft, every hill of melons, row of corn, or quickset hedge, all
he has done, and all he means to do, stand in his way, like duns,
when he would go out of his gate.  The devotion to these vines and
trees he finds poisonous.  Long free walks, a circuit of miles, free
his brain, and serve his body.  Long marches are no hardship to him.
He believes he composes easily on the hills.  But this pottering in a
few square yards of garden is dispiriting and drivelling.  The smell
of the plants has drugged him, and robbed him of energy.  He finds a
catalepsy in his bones.  He grows peevish and poor-spirited.  The
genius of reading and of gardening are antagonistic, like resinous
and vitreous electricity.  One is concentrative in sparks and shocks:
the other is diffuse strength; so that each disqualifies its workman
for the other's duties.

        An engraver whose hands must be of an exquisite delicacy of
stroke, should not lay stone walls.  Sir David Brewster gives exact
instructions for microscopic observation: -- "Lie down on your back,
and hold the single lens and object over your eye," &c. &c.  How much
more the seeker of abstract truth, who needs periods of isolation,
and rapt concentration, and almost a going out of the body to think!

        2. Spend after your genius, _and by system_.  Nature goes by
rule, not by sallies and saltations.  There must be system in the
economies.  Saving and unexpensiveness will not keep the most
pathetic family from ruin, nor will bigger incomes make free spending
safe.  The secret of success lies never in the amount of money, but
in the relation of income to outgo; as if, after expense has been
fixed at a certain point, then new and steady rills of income, though
never so small, being added, wealth begins.  But in ordinary, as
means increase, spending increases faster, so that, large incomes, in
England and elsewhere, are found not to help matters; -- the eating
quality of debt does not relax its voracity.  When the cholera is in
the potato, what is the use of planting larger crops?  In England,
the richest country in the universe, I was assured by shrewd
observers, that great lords and ladies had no more guineas to give
away than other people; that liberality with money is as rare, and as
immediately famous a virtue as it is here.  Want is a growing giant
whom the coat of Have was never large enough to cover.  I remember in
Warwickshire, to have been shown a fair manor, still in the same name
as in Shakspeare's time.  The rent-roll, I was told, is some fourteen
thousand pounds a year: but, when the second son of the late
proprietor was born, the father was perplexed how to provide for him.
The eldest son must inherit the manor; what to do with this
supernumerary?  He was advised to breed him for the Church, and to
settle him in the rectorship, which was in the gift of the family;
which was done.  It is a general rule in that country, that bigger
incomes do not help anybody.  It is commonly observed, that a sudden
wealth, like a prize drawn in a lottery, or a large bequest to a poor
family, does not permanently enrich.  They have served no
apprenticeship to wealth, and, with the rapid wealth, come rapid
claims: which they do not know how to deny, and the treasure is
quickly dissipated.

        A system must be in every economy, or the best single
expedients are of no avail.  A farm is a good thing, when it begins
and ends with itself, and does not need a salary, or a shop, to eke
it out.  Thus, the cattle are a main link in the chain-ring.  If the
non-conformist or aesthetic farmer leaves out the cattle, and does
not also leave out the want which the cattle must supply, he must
fill the gap by begging or stealing.  When men now alive were born,
the farm yielded everything that was consumed on it.  The farm
yielded no money, and the farmer got on without.  If he fell sick,
his neighbors came in to his aid: each gave a day's work; or a half
day; or lent his yoke of oxen, or his horse, and kept his work even:
hoed his potatoes, mowed his hay, reaped his rye; well knowing that
no man could afford to hire labor, without selling his land.  In
autumn, a farmer could sell an ox or a hog, and get a little money to
pay taxes withal.  Now, the farmer buys almost all he consumes, --
tin-ware, cloth, sugar, tea, coffee, fish, coal, railroad-tickets,
and newspapers.

        A master in each art is required, because the practice is never
with still or dead subjects, but they change in your hands.  You
think farm-buildings and broad acres a solid property: but its value
is flowing like water.  It requires as much watching as if you were
decanting wine from a cask.  The farmer knows what to do with it,
stops every leak, turns all the streamlets to one reservoir, and
decants wine: but a blunderhead comes out of Cornhill, tries his
hand, and it all leaks away.  So is it with granite streets, or
timber townships, as with fruit or flowers.  Nor is any investment so
permanent, that it can be allowed to remain without incessant
watching, as the history of each attempt to lock up an inheritance
through two generations for an unborn inheritor may show.

        When Mr. Cockayne takes a cottage in the country, and will keep
his cow, he thinks a cow is a creature that is fed on hay, and gives
a pail of milk twice a day.  But the cow that he buys gives milk for
three months; then her bag dries up.  What to do with a dry cow? who
will buy her?  Perhaps he bought also a yoke of oxen to do his work;
but they get blown and lame.  What to do with blown and lame oxen?
The farmer fats his, after the spring-work is done, and kills them in
the fall.  But how can Cockayne, who has no pastures, and leaves his
cottage daily in the cars, at business hours, be pothered with
fatting and killing oxen?  He plants trees; but there must be crops,
to keep the trees in ploughed land.  What shall be the crops?  He
will have nothing to do with trees, but will have grass.  After a
year or two, the grass must be turned up and ploughed: now what
crops?  Credulous Cockayne!

        3. Help comes in the custom of the country, and the rule of
_Impera parendo_.  The rule is not to dictate, nor to insist on
carrying out each of your schemes by ignorant wilfulness, but to
learn practically the secret spoken from all nature, that things
themselves refuse to be mismanaged, and will show to the watchful
their own law.  Nobody need stir hand or foot.  The custom of the
country will do it all.  I know not how to build or to plant; neither
how to buy wood, nor what to do with the house-lot, the field, or the
wood-lot, when bought.  Never fear: it is all settled how it shall
be, long beforehand, in the custom of the country, whether to sand,
or whether to clay it, when to plough, and how to dress, whether to
grass, or to corn; and you cannot help or hinder it.  Nature has her
own best mode of doing each thing, and she has somewhere told it
plainly, if we will keep our eyes and ears open.  If not, she will
not be slow in undeceiving us, when we prefer our own way to hers.
How often we must remember the art of the surgeon, which, in
replacing the broken bone, contents itself with releasing the parts
from false position; they fly into place by the action of the
muscles.  On this art of nature all our arts rely.

        Of the two eminent engineers in the recent construction of
railways in England, Mr. Brunel went straight from terminus to
terminus, through mountains, over streams, crossing highways, cutting
ducal estates in two, and shooting through this man's cellar, and
that man's attic window, and so arriving at his end, at great
pleasure to geometers, but with cost to his company.  Mr. Stephenson,
on the contrary, believing that the river knows the way, followed his
valley, as implicitly as our Western Railroad follows the Westfield
River, and turned out to be the safest and cheapest engineer.  We say
the cows laid out Boston.  Well, there are worse surveyors.  Every
pedestrian in our pastures has frequent occasion to thank the cows
for cutting the best path through the thicket, and over the hills:
and travellers and Indians know the value of a buffalo-trail, which
is sure to be the easiest possible pass through the ridge.

        When a citizen, fresh from Dock-square, or Milk-street, comes
out and buys land in the country, his first thought is to a fine
outlook from his windows: his library must command a western view: a
sunset every day, bathing the shoulder of Blue Hills, Wachusett, and
the peaks of Monadnoc and Uncanoonuc.  What, thirty acres, and all
this magnificence for fifteen hundred dollars!  It would be cheap at
fifty thousand.  He proceeds at once, his eyes dim with tears of joy,
to fix the spot for his corner-stone.  But the man who is to level
the ground, thinks it will take many hundred loads of gravel to fill
the hollow to the road.  The stone-mason who should build the well
thinks he shall have to dig forty feet: the baker doubts he shall
never like to drive up to the door: the practical neighbor cavils at
the position of the barn; and the citizen comes to know that his
predecessor the farmer built the house in the right spot for the sun
and wind, the spring, and water-drainage, and the convenience to the
pasture, the garden, the field, and the road.  So Dock-square yields
the point, and things have their own way.  Use has made the farmer
wise, and the foolish citizen learns to take his counsel.  From step
to step he comes at last to surrender at discretion.  The farmer
affects to take his orders; but the citizen says, You may ask me as
often as you will, and in what ingenious forms, for an opinion
concerning the mode of building my wall, or sinking my well, or
laying out my acre, but the ball will rebound to you.  These are
matters on which I neither know, nor need to know anything.  These
are questions which you and not I shall answer.

        Not less, within doors, a system settles itself paramount and
tyrannical over master and mistress, servant and child, cousin and
acquaintance.  'Tis in vain that genius or virtue or energy of
character strive and cry against it.  This is fate.  And 'tis very
well that the poor husband reads in a book of a new way of living,
and resolves to adopt it at home: let him go home and try it, if he
dare.

        4. Another point of economy is to look for seed of the same
kind as you sow: and not to hope to buy one kind with another kind.
Friendship buys friendship; justice, justice; military merit,
military success.  Good husbandry finds wife, children, and
household.  The good merchant large gains, ships, stocks, and money.
The good poet fame, and literary credit; but not either, the other.
Yet there is commonly a confusion of expectations on these points.
Hotspur lives for the moment; praises himself for it; and despises
Furlong, that he does not.  Hotspur, of course, is poor; and Furlong
a good provider.  The odd circumstance is, that Hotspur thinks it a
superiority in himself, this improvidence, which ought to be rewarded
with Furlong's lands.

        I have not at all completed my design.  But we must not leave
the topic, without casting one glance into the interior recesses.  It
is a doctrine of philosophy, that man is a being of degrees; that
there is nothing in the world, which is not repeated in his body; his
body being a sort of miniature or summary of the world: then that
there is nothing in his body, which is not repeated as in a celestial
sphere in his mind: then, there is nothing in his brain, which is not
repeated in a higher sphere, in his moral system.

        5. Now these things are so in Nature.  All things ascend, and
the royal rule of economy is, that it should ascend also, or,
whatever we do must always have a higher aim.  Thus it is a maxim,
that money is another kind of blood.  _Pecunia alter sanguis_: or,
the estate of a man is only a larger kind of body, and admits of
regimen analogous to his bodily circulations.  So there is no maxim
of the merchant, _e. g._, "Best use of money is to pay debts;" "Every
business by itself;" "Best time is present time;" "The right
investment is in tools of your trade;" or the like, which does not
admit of an extended sense.  The counting-room maxims liberally
expounded are laws of the Universe.  The merchant's economy is a
coarse symbol of the soul's economy.  It is, to spend for power, and
not for pleasure.  It is to invest income; that is to say, to take up
particulars into generals; days into integral eras, -- literary,
emotive, practical, of its life, and still to ascend in its
investment.  The merchant has but one rule, _absorb and invest_: he
is to be capitalist: the scraps and filings must be gathered back
into the crucible; the gas and smoke must be burned, and earnings
must not go to increase expense, but to capital again.  Well, the man
must be capitalist.  Will he spend his income, or will he invest?
His body and every organ is under the same law.  His body is a jar,
in which the liquor of life is stored.  Will he spend for pleasure?
The way to ruin is short and facile.  Will he not spend, but hoard
for power?  It passes through the sacred fermentations, by that law
of Nature whereby everything climbs to higher platforms, and bodily
vigor becomes mental and moral vigor.  The bread he eats is first
strength and animal spirits: it becomes, in higher laboratories,
imagery and thought; and in still higher results, courage and
endurance.  This is the right compound interest; this is capital
doubled, quadrupled, centupled; man raised to his highest power.

        The true thrift is always to spend on the higher plane; to
invest and invest, with keener avarice, that he may spend in
spiritual creation, and not in augmenting animal existence.  Nor is
the man enriched, in repeating the old experiments of animal
sensation, nor unless through new powers and ascending pleasures, he
knows himself by the actual experience of higher good, to be already
on the way to the highest.

 
 
        IV
 
        CULTURE
 
        Can rules or tutors educate
        The semigod whom we await?
        He must be musical,
        Tremulous, impressional,
        Alive to gentle influence
        Of landscape and of sky,
        And tender to the spirit-touch
        Of man's or maiden's eye:
        But, to his native centre fast,
        Shall into Future fuse the Past,
        And the world's flowing fates in
        his own mould recast.
 
 
        _Culture_

        The word of ambition at the present day is Culture.  Whilst all
the world is in pursuit of power, and of wealth as a means of power,
culture corrects the theory of success.  A man is the prisoner of his
power.  A topical memory makes him an almanac; a talent for debate, a
disputant; skill to get money makes him a miser, that is, a beggar.
Culture reduces these inflammations by invoking the aid of other
powers against the dominant talent, and by appealing to the rank of
powers.  It watches success.  For performance, Nature has no mercy,
and sacrifices the performer to get it done; makes a dropsy or a
tympany of him.  If she wants a thumb, she makes one at the cost of
arms and legs, and any excess of power in one part is usually paid
for at once by some defect in a contiguous part.

        Our efficiency depends so much on our concentration, that
Nature usually in the instances where a marked man is sent into the
world, overloads him with bias, sacrificing his symmetry to his
working power.  It is said, no man can write but one book; and if a
man have a defect, it is apt to leave its impression on all his
performances.  If she creates a policeman like Fouche, he is made up
of suspicions and of plots to circumvent them.  "The air," said
Fouche, "is full of poniards." The physician Sanctorius spent his
life in a pair of scales, weighing his food.  Lord Coke valued
Chaucer highly, because the Canon Yeman's Tale illustrates the
statute _Hen. V. Chap. 4,_ against alchemy.  I saw a man who believed
the principal mischiefs in the English state were derived from the
devotion to musical concerts.  A freemason, not long since, set out
to explain to this country, that the principal cause of the success
of General Washington, was, the aid he derived from the freemasons.

        But worse than the harping on one string, Nature has secured
individualism, by giving the private person a high conceit of his
weight in the system.  The pest of society is egotists.  There are
dull and bright, sacred and profane, coarse and fine egotists.  'Tis
a disease that, like influenza, falls on all constitutions.  In the
distemper known to physicians as _chorea_, the patient sometimes
turns round, and continues to spin slowly on one spot.  Is egotism a
metaphysical varioloid of this malady?  The man runs round a ring
formed by his own talent, falls into an admiration of it, and loses
relation to the world.  It is a tendency in all minds.  One of its
annoying forms, is a craving for sympathy.  The sufferers parade
their miseries, tear the lint from their bruises, reveal their
indictable crimes, that you may pity them.  They like sickness,
because physical pain will extort some show of interest from the
bystanders, as we have seen children, who, finding themselves of no
account when grown people come in, will cough till they choke, to
draw attention.

        This distemper is the scourge of talent, -- of artists,
inventors, and philosophers.  Eminent spiritualists shall have an
incapacity of putting their act or word aloof from them, and seeing
it bravely for the nothing it is.  Beware of the man who says, "I am
on the eve of a revelation." It is speedily punished, inasmuch as
this habit invites men to humor it, and by treating the patient
tenderly, to shut him up in a narrower selfism, and exclude him from
the great world of God's cheerful fallible men and women.  Let us
rather be insulted, whilst we are insultable.  Religious literature
has eminent examples, and if we run over our private list of poets,
critics, philanthropists, and philosophers, we shall find them
infected with this dropsy and elephantiasis, which we ought to have
tapped.

        This goitre of egotism is so frequent among notable persons,
that we must infer some strong necessity in nature which it
subserves; such as we see in the sexual attraction.  The preservation
of the species was a point of such necessity, that Nature has secured
it at all hazards by immensely overloading the passion, at the risk
of perpetual crime and disorder.  So egotism has its root in the
cardinal necessity by which each individual persists to be what he
is.

        This individuality is not only not inconsistent with culture,
but is the basis of it.  Every valuable nature is there in its own
right, and the student we speak to must have a motherwit invincible
by his culture, which uses all books, arts, facilities, and
elegancies of intercourse, but is never subdued and lost in them.  He
only is a well-made man who has a good determination.  And the end of
culture is not to destroy this, God forbid! but to train away all
impediment and mixture, and leave nothing but pure power.  Our
student must have a style and determination, and be a master in his
own specialty.  But, having this, he must put it behind him.  He must
have a catholicity, a power to see with a free and disengaged look
every object.  Yet is this private interest and self so overcharged,
that, if a man seeks a companion who can look at objects for their
own sake, and without affection or self-reference, he will find the
fewest who will give him that satisfaction; whilst most men are
afflicted with a coldness, an incuriosity, as soon as any object does
not connect with their self-love.  Though they talk of the object
before them, they are thinking of themselves, and their vanity is
laying little traps for your admiration.

        But after a man has discovered that there are limits to the
interest which his private history has for mankind, he still
converses with his family, or a few companions, -- perhaps with half
a dozen personalities that are famous in his neighborhood.  In
Boston, the question of life is the names of some eight or ten men.
Have you seen Mr. Allston, Doctor Channing, Mr. Adams, Mr. Webster,
Mr. Greenough?  Have you heard Everett, Garrison, Father Taylor,
Theodore Parker?  Have you talked with Messieurs Turbinewheel,
Summitlevel, and Lacofrupees?  Then you may as well die.  In New
York, the question is of some other eight, or ten, or twenty.  Have
you seen a few lawyers, merchants, and brokers, -- two or three
scholars, two or three capitalists, two or three editors of
newspapers?  New York is a sucked orange.  All conversation is at an
end, when we have discharged ourselves of a dozen personalities,
domestic or imported, which make up our American existence.  Nor do
we expect anybody to be other than a faint copy of these heroes.

        Life is very narrow.  Bring any club or company of intelligent
men together again after ten years, and if the presence of some
penetrating and calming genius could dispose them to frankness, what
a confession of insanities would come up!  The "causes" to which we
have sacrificed, Tariff or Democracy, Whigism or Abolition,
Temperance or Socialism, would show like roots of bitterness and
dragons of wrath: and our talents are as mischievous as if each had
been seized upon by some bird of prey, which had whisked him away
from fortune, from truth, from the dear society of the poets, some
zeal, some bias, and only when he was now gray and nerveless, was it
relaxing its claws, and he awaking to sober perceptions.

        Culture is the suggestion from certain best thoughts, that a
man has a range of affinities, through which he can modulate the
violence of any master-tones that have a droning preponderance in his
scale, and succor him against himself.  Culture redresses his
balance, puts him among his equals and superiors, revives the
delicious sense of sympathy, and warns him of the dangers of solitude
and repulsion.

        'Tis not a compliment but a disparagement to consult a man only
on horses, or on steam, or on theatres, or on eating, or on books,
and, whenever he appears, considerately to turn the conversation to
the bantling he is known to fondle.  In the Norse heaven of our
forefathers, Thor's house had five hundred and forty floors; and
man's house has five hundred and forty floors.  His excellence is
facility of adaptation and of transition through many related points,
to wide contrasts and extremes.  Culture kills his exaggeration, his
conceit of his village or his city.  We must leave our pets at home,
when we go into the street, and meet men on broad grounds of good
meaning and good sense.  No performance is worth loss of geniality.
'Tis a cruel price we pay for certain fancy goods called fine arts
and philosophy.  In the Norse legend, Allfadir did not get a drink of
Mimir's spring, (the fountain of wisdom,) until he left his eye in
pledge.  And here is a pedant that cannot unfold his wrinkles, nor
conceal his wrath at interruption by the best, if their conversation
do not fit his impertinency, -- here is he to afflict us with his
personalities.  'Tis incident to scholars, that each of them fancies
he is pointedly odious in his community.  Draw him out of this limbo
of irritability.  Cleanse with healthy blood his parchment skin.  You
restore to him his eyes which he left in pledge at Mimir's spring.
If you are the victim of your doing, who cares what you do?  We can
spare your opera, your gazetteer, your chemic analysis, your history,
your syllogisms.  Your man of genius pays dear for his distinction.
His head runs up into a spire, and instead of a healthy man, merry
and wise, he is some mad dominie.  Nature is reckless of the
individual.  When she has points to carry, she carries them.  To wade
in marshes and sea-margins is the destiny of certain birds, and they
are so accurately made for this, that they are imprisoned in those
places.  Each animal out of its _habitat_ would starve.  To the
physician, each man, each woman, is an amplification of one organ.  A
soldier, a locksmith, a bank-clerk, and a dancer could not exchange
functions.  And thus we are victims of adaptation.

        The antidotes against this organic egotism, are, the range and
variety of attractions, as gained by acquaintance with the world,
with men of merit, with classes of society, with travel, with eminent
persons, and with the high resources of philosophy, art, and
religion: books, travel, society, solitude.

        The hardiest skeptic who has seen a horse broken, a pointer
trained, or, who has visited a menagerie, or the exhibition of the
Industrious Fleas, will not deny the validity of education.  "A boy,"
says Plato, "is the most vicious of all wild beasts;" and, in the
same spirit, the old English poet Gascoigne says, "a boy is better
unborn than untaught." The city breeds one kind of speech and
manners; the back-country a different style; the sea, another; the
army, a fourth.  We know that an army which can be confided in, may
be formed by discipline; that, by systematic discipline all men may
be made heroes: Marshal Lannes said to a French officer, "Know,
Colonel, that none but a poltroon will boast that he never was
afraid." A great part of courage is the courage of having done the
thing before.  And, in all human action, those faculties will be
strong which are used.  Robert Owen said, "Give me a tiger, and I
will educate him." 'Tis inhuman to want faith in the power of
education, since to meliorate, is the law of nature; and men are
valued precisely as they exert onward or melio-rating force.  On the
other hand, poltroonery is the acknowledging an inferiority to be
incurable.

        Incapacity of melioration is the only mortal distemper.  There
are people who can never understand a trope, or any second or
expanded sense given to your words, or any humor; but remain
literalists, after hearing the music, and poetry, and rhetoric, and
wit, of seventy or eighty years.  They are past the help of surgeon
or clergy.  But even these can understand pitchforks and the cry of
fire! and I have noticed in some of this class a marked dislike of
earthquakes.

        Let us make our education brave and preventive.  Politics is an
after-work, a poor patching.  We are always a little late.  The evil
is done, the law is passed, and we begin the up-hill agitation for
repeal of that of which we ought to have prevented the enacting.  We
shall one day learn to supersede politics by education.  What we call
our root-and-branch reforms of slavery, war, gambling, intemperance,
is only medicating the symptoms.  We must begin higher up, namely, in
Education.

        Our arts and tools give to him who can handle them much the
same advantage over the novice, as if you extended his life, ten,
fifty, or a hundred years.  And I think it the part of good sense to
provide every fine soul with such culture, that it shall not, at
thirty or forty years, have to say, `This which I might do is made
hopeless through my want of weapons.'

        But it is conceded that much of our training fails of effect;
that all success is hazardous and rare; that a large part of our cost
and pains is thrown away.  Nature takes the matter into her own
hands, and, though we must not omit any jot of our system, we can
seldom be sure that it has availed much, or, that as much good would
not have accrued from a different system.

        Books, as containing the finest records of human wit, must
always enter into our notion of culture.  The best heads that ever
existed, Pericles, Plato, Julius Caesar, Shakspeare, Goethe, Milton,
were well-read, universally educated men, and quite too wise to
undervalue letters.  Their opinion has weight, because they had means
of knowing the opposite opinion.  We look that a great man should be
a good reader, or, in proportion to the spontaneous power should be
the assimilating power.  Good criticism is very rare, and always
precious.  I am always happy to meet persons who perceive the
transcendent superiority of Shakspeare over all other writers.  I
like people who like Plato.  Because this love does not consist with
self-conceit.

        But books are good only as far as a boy is ready for them.  He
sometimes gets ready very slowly.  You send your child to the
schoolmaster, but 'tis the schoolboys who educate him.  You send him
to the Latin class, but much of his tuition comes, on his way to
school, from the shop-windows.  You like the strict rules and the
long terms; and he finds his best leading in a by-way of his own, and
refuses any companions but of his choosing.  He hates the grammar and
_Gradus_, and loves guns, fishing-rods, horses, and boats.  Well, the
boy is right; and you are not fit to direct his bringing up, if your
theory leaves out his gymnastic training.  Archery, cricket, gun and
fishing-rod, horse and boat, are all educators, liberalizers; and so
are dancing, dress, and the street-talk; and,-- provided only the boy
has resources, and is of a noble and ingenuous strain, -- these will
not serve him less than the books.  He learns chess, whist, dancing,
and theatricals.  The father observes that another boy has learned
algebra and geometry in the same time.  But the first boy has
acquired much more than these poor games along with them.  He is
infatuated for weeks with whist and chess; but presently will find
out, as you did, that when he rises from the game too long played, he
is vacant and forlorn, and despises himself.  Thenceforward it takes
place with other things, and has its due weight in his experience.
These minor skills and accomplishments, for example, dancing, are
tickets of admission to the dress-circle of mankind, and the being
master of them enables the youth to judge intelligently of much, on
which, otherwise, he would give a pedantic squint.  Landor said, "I
have suffered more from my bad dancing, than from all the misfortunes
and miseries of my life put together." Provided always the boy is
teachable, (for we are not proposing to make a statue out of punk,)
football, cricket, archery, swimming, skating, climbing, fencing,
riding, are lessons in the art of power, which it is his main
business to learn; -- riding, specially, of which Lord Herbert of
Cherbury said, "a good rider on a good horse is as much above himself
and others as the world can make him." Besides, the gun, fishing-rod,
boat, and horse, constitute, among all who use them, secret
freemasonries.  They are as if they belonged to one club.

        There is also a negative value in these arts.  Their chief use
to the youth, is, not amusement, but to be known for what they are,
and not to remain to him occasions of heart-burn.  We are full of
superstitions.  Each class fixes its eyes on the advantages it has
not; the refined, on rude strength; the democrat, on birth and
breeding.  One of the benefits of a college education is, to show the
boy its little avail.  I knew a leading man in a leading city, who,
having set his heart on an education at the university, and missed
it, could never quite feel himself the equal of his own brothers who
had gone thither.  His easy superiority to multitudes of professional
men could never quite countervail to him this imaginary defect.
Balls, riding, wine-parties, and billiards, pass to a poor boy for
something fine and romantic, which they are not; and a free admission
to them on an equal footing, if it were possible, only once or twice,
would be worth ten times its cost, by undeceiving him.

        I am not much an advocate for travelling, and I observe that
men run away to other countries, because they are not good in their
own, and run back to their own, because they pass for nothing in the
new places.  For the most part, only the light characters travel.
Who are you that have no task to keep you at home?  I have been
quoted as saying captious things about travel; but I mean to do
justice.  I think, there is a restlessness in our people, which
argues want of character.  All educated Americans, first or last, go
to Europe; -- perhaps, because it is their mental home, as the
invalid habits of this country might suggest.  An eminent teacher of
girls said, "the idea of a girl's education, is, whatever qualifies
them for going to Europe." Can we never extract this tape-worm of
Europe from the brain of our countrymen?  One sees very well what
their fate must be.  He that does not fill a place at home, cannot
abroad.  He only goes there to hide his insignificance in a larger
crowd.  You do not think you will find anything there which you have
not seen at home?  The stuff of all countries is just the same.  Do
you suppose, there is any country where they do not scald milkpans,
and swaddle the infants, and burn the brushwood, and broil the fish?
What is true anywhere is true everywhere.  And let him go where he
will, he can only find so much beauty or worth as he carries.

        Of course, for some men, travel may be useful.  Naturalists,
discoverers, and sailors are born.  Some men are made for couriers,
exchangers, envoys, missionaries, bearers of despatches, as others
are for farmers and working-men.  And if the man is of a light and
social turn, and Nature has aimed to make a legged and winged
creature, framed for locomotion, we must follow her hint, and furnish
him with that breeding which gives currency, as sedulously as with
that which gives worth.  But let us not be pedantic, but allow to
travel its full effect.  The boy grown up on the farm, which he has
never left, is said in the country to have had _no chance_, and boys
and men of that condition look upon work on a railroad, or drudgery
in a city, as opportunity.  Poor country boys of Vermont and
Connecticut formerly owed what knowledge they had, to their peddling
trips to the Southern States.  California and the Pacific Coast is
now the university of this class, as Virginia was in old times.  `To
have _some chance_' is their word.  And the phrase `to know the
world,' or to travel, is synonymous with all men's ideas of advantage
and superiority.  No doubt, to a man of sense, travel offers
advantages.  As many languages as he has, as many friends, as many
arts and trades, so many times is he a man.  A foreign country is a
point of comparison, wherefrom to judge his own.  One use of travel,
is, to recommend the books and works of home; [we go to Europe to be
Americanized;] and another, to find men.  For, as Nature has put
fruits apart in latitudes, a new fruit in every degree, so knowledge
and fine moral quality she lodges in distant men.  And thus, of the
six or seven teachers whom each man wants among his contemporaries,
it often happens, that one or two of them live on the other side of
the world.

        Moreover, there is in every constitution a certain solstice,
when the stars stand still in our inward firmament, and when there is
required some foreign force, some diversion or alterative to prevent
stagnation.  And, as a medical remedy, travel seems one of the best.
Just as a man witnessing the admirable effect of ether to lull pain,
and meditating on the contingencies of wounds, cancers, lockjaws,
rejoices in Dr. Jackson's benign discovery, so a man who looks at
Paris, at Naples, or at London, says, `If I should be driven from my
own home, here, at least, my thoughts can be consoled by the most
prodigal amusement and occupation which the human race in ages could
contrive and accumulate.'

        Akin to the benefit of foreign travel, the aesthetic value of
railroads is to unite the advantages of town and country life,
neither of which we can spare.  A man should live in or near a large
town, because, let his own genius be what it may, it will repel quite
as much of agreeable and valuable talent as it draws, and, in a city,
the total attraction of all the citizens is sure to conquer, first or
last, every repulsion, and drag the most improbable hermit within its
walls some day in the year.  In town, he can find the
swimming-school, the gymnasium, the dancing-master, the
shooting-gallery, opera, theatre, and panorama; the chemist's shop,
the museum of natural history; the gallery of fine arts; the national
orators, in their turn; foreign travellers, the libraries, and his
club.  In the country, he can find solitude and reading, manly labor,
cheap living, and his old shoes; moors for game, hills for geology,
and groves for devotion.  Aubrey writes, "I have heard Thomas Hobbes
say, that, in the Earl of Devon's house, in Derbyshire, there was a
good library and books enough for him, and his lordship stored the
library with what books he thought fit to be bought.  But the want of
good conversation was a very great inconvenience, and, though he
conceived he could order his thinking as well as another, yet he
found a great defect.  In the country, in long time, for want of good
conversation, one's understanding and invention contract a moss on
them, like an old paling in an orchard."

        Cities give us collision.  'Tis said, London and New York take
the nonsense out of a man.  A great part of our education is
sympathetic and social.  Boys and girls who have been brought up with
well-informed and superior people, show in their manners an
inestimable grace.  Fuller says, that "William, Earl of Nassau, won a
subject from the King of Spain, every time he put off his hat." You
cannot have one well-bred man, without a whole society of such.  They
keep each other up to any high point.  Especially women; -- it
requires a great many cultivated women, -- saloons of bright,
elegant, reading women, accustomed to ease and refinement, to
spectacles, pictures, sculpture, poetry, and to elegant society, in
order that you should have one Madame de Stael.  The head of a
commercial house, or a leading lawyer or politician is brought into
daily contact with troops of men from all parts of the country, and
those too the driving-wheels, the business men of each section, and
one can hardly suggest for an apprehensive man a more searching
culture.  Besides, we must remember the high social possibilities of
a million of men.  The best bribe which London offers to-day to the
imagination, is, that, in such a vast variety of people and
conditions, one can believe there is room for persons of romantic
character to exist, and that the poet, the mystic, and the hero may
hope to confront their counterparts.
 
      I wish cities could teach their best lesson, -- of quiet
manners.  It is the foible especially of American youth, --
pretension.  The mark of the man of the world is absence of
pretension.  He does not make a speech; he takes a low business-tone,
avoids all brag, is nobody, dresses plainly, promises not at all,
performs much, speaks in monosyllables, hugs his fact.  He calls his
employment by its lowest name, and so takes from evil tongues their
sharpest weapon.  His conversation clings to the weather and the
news, yet he allows him-self to be surprised into thought, and the
unlocking of his learning and philosophy.  How the imagination is
piqued by anecdotes of some great man passing incognito, as a king in
gray clothes, -- of Napoleon affecting a plain suit at his glittering
levee; of Burns, or Scott, or Beethoven, or Wellington, or Goethe, or
any container of transcendent power, passing for nobody; of
Epaminondas, "who never says anything, but will listen eternally;" of
Goethe, who preferred trifling subjects and common expressions in
intercourse with strangers, worse rather than better clothes, and to
appear a little more capricious than he was.  There are advantages in
the old hat and box-coat.  I have heard, that, throughout this
country, a certain respect is paid to good broadcloth; but dress
makes a little restraint: men will not commit themselves.  But the
box-coat is like wine; it unlocks the tongue, and men say what they
think.  An old poet says,

        "Go far and go sparing,
        For you'll find it certain,
        The poorer and the baser you appear,
        The more you'll look through still." (*)

        (*) Beaumont and Fletcher: _The Tamer Tamed._

        Not much otherwise Milnes writes, in the "Lay of the Humble,"
 
                "To me men are for what they are,
                They wear no masks with me."

        'Tis odd that our people should have -- not water on the brain,
-- but a little gas there.  A shrewd foreigner said of the Americans,
that, "whatever they say has a little the air of a speech." Yet one
of the traits down in the books as distinguishing the Anglo-Saxon,
is, a trick of self-disparagement.  To be sure, in old, dense
countries, among a million of good coats, a fine coat comes to be no
distinction, and you find humorists.  In an English party, a man with
no marked manners or features, with a face like red dough,
unexpectedly discloses wit, learning, a wide range of topics, and
personal familiarity with good men in all parts of the world, until
you think you have fallen upon some illustrious personage.  Can it be
that the American forest has refreshed some weeds of old Pietish
barbarism just ready to die out, -- the love of the scarlet feather,
of beads, and tinsel?  The Italians are fond of red clothes, peacock
plumes, and embroidery; and I remember one rainy morning in the city
of Palermo, the street was in a blaze with scarlet umbrellas.  The
English have a plain taste.  The equipages of the grandees are plain.
A gorgeous livery indicates new and awkward city wealth.  Mr. Pitt,
like Mr. Pym, thought the title of _Mister_ good against any king in
Europe.  They have piqued themselves on governing the whole world in
the poor, plain, dark Committee-room which the House of Commons sat
in, before the fire.

        Whilst we want cities as the centres where the best things are
found, cities degrade us by magnifying trifles.  The countryman finds
the town a chop-house, a barber's shop.  He has lost the lines of
grandeur of the horizon, hills and plains, and with them, sobriety
and elevation.  He has come among a supple, glib-tongued tribe, who
live for show, servile to public opinion.  Life is dragged down to a
fracas of pitiful cares and disasters.  You say the gods ought to
respect a life whose objects are their own; but in cities they have
betrayed you to a cloud of insignificant annoyances:

 
        "Mirmidons, race feconde,
        Mirmidons,
        Enfin nous commandons;
        Jupiter livre le monde
        Aux mirmidons, aux mirmidons." (*)
 
        'Tis heavy odds
        Against the gods,
        When they will match with myrmidons.
        We spawning, spawning myrmidons,
        Our turn to-day! we take command,
        Jove gives the globe into the hand
        Of myrmidons, of myrmidons.

        (*) Beranger.

        What is odious but noise, and people who scream and bewail?
people whose vane points always east, who live to dine, who send for
the doctor, who coddle themselves, who toast their feet on the
register, who intrigue to secure a padded chair, and a corner out of
the draught.  Suffer them once to begin the enumeration of their
infirmities, and the sun will go down on the unfinished tale.  Let
these triflers put us out of conceit with petty comforts.  To a man
at work, the frost is but a color: the rain, the wind, he forgot them
when he came in.  Let us learn to live coarsely, dress plainly, and
lie hard.  The least habit of dominion over the palate has certain
good effects not easily estimated.  Neither will we be driven into a
quiddling abstemiousness.  'Tis a superstition to insist on a special
diet.  All is made at last of the same chemical atoms.

        A man in pursuit of greatness feels no little wants.  How can
you mind diet, bed, dress, or salutes or compliments, or the figure
you make in company, or wealth, or even the bringing things to pass,
when you think how paltry are the machinery and the workers?
Wordsworth was praised to me, in Westmoreland, for having afforded to
his country neighbors an example of a modest household where comfort
and culture were secured, without display.  And a tender boy who
wears his rusty cap and outgrown coat, that he may secure the coveted
place in college, and the right in the library, is educated to some
purpose.  There is a great deal of self-denial and manliness in poor
and middle-class houses, in town and country, that has not got into
literature, and never will, but that keeps the earth sweet; that
saves on superfluities, and spends on essentials; that goes rusty,
and educates the boy; that sells the horse, but builds the school;
works early and late, takes two looms in the factory, three looms,
six looms, but pays off the mortgage on the paternal farm, and then
goes back cheerfully to work again.

        We can ill spare the commanding social benefits of cities; they
must be used; yet cautiously, and haughtily, -- and will yield their
best values to him who best can do without them.  Keep the town for
occasions, but the habits should be formed to retirement.  Solitude,
the safeguard of mediocrity, is to genius the stern friend, the cold,
obscure shelter where moult the wings which will bear it farther than
suns and stars.  He who should inspire and lead his race must be
defended from travelling with the souls of other men, from living,
breathing, reading, and writing in the daily, time-worn yoke of their
opinions.  "In the morning, -- solitude;" said Pythagoras; that
Nature may speak to the imagination, as she does never in company,
and that her favorite may make acquaintance with those divine
strengths which disclose themselves to serious and abstracted
thought.  'Tis very certain that Plato, Plotinus, Archimedes, Hermes,
Newton, Milton, Wordsworth, did not live in a crowd, but descended
into it from time to time as benefactors: and the wise instructor
will press this point of securing to the young soul in the
disposition of time and the arrangements of living, periods and
habits of solitude.  The high advantage of university-life is often
the mere mechanical one, I may call it, of a separate chamber and
fire, -- which parents will allow the boy without hesitation at
Cambridge, but do not think needful at home.  We say solitude, to
mark the character of the tone of thought; but if it can be shared
between two or more than two, it is happier, and not less noble.  "We
four," wrote Neander to his sacred friends, "will enjoy at Halle the
inward blessedness of a _civitas Dei_, whose foundations are forever
friendship.  The more I know you, the more I dissatisfy and must
dissatisfy all my wonted companions.  Their very presence stupefies
me.  The common understanding withdraws itself from the one centre of
all existence."

        Solitude takes off the pressure of present importunities that
more catholic and humane relations may appear.  The saint and poet
seek privacy to ends the most public and universal: and it is the
secret of culture, to interest the man more in his public, than in
his private quality.  Here is a new poem, which elicits a good many
comments in the journals, and in conversation.  From these it is
easy, at last, to eliminate the verdict which readers passed upon it;
and that is, in the main, unfavorable.  The poet, as a craftsman, is
only interested in the praise accorded to him, and not in the
censure, though it be just.  And the poor little poet hearkens only
to that, and rejects the censure, as proving incapacity in the
critic.  But the poet _cultivated_ becomes a stockholder in both
companies, -- say Mr. Curfew, -- in the Curfew stock, and in the
_humanity_ stock; and, in the last, exults as much in the
demonstration of the unsoundness of Curfew, as his interest in the
former gives him pleasure in the currency of Curfew.  For, the
depreciation of his Curfew stock only shows the immense values of the
humanity stock.  As soon as he sides with his critic against himself,
with joy, he is a cultivated man.

        We must have an intellectual quality in all property and in all
action, or they are nought.  I must have children, I must have
events, I must have a social state and history, or my thinking and
speaking want body or basis.  But to give these accessories any
value, I must know them as contingent and rather showy possessions,
which pass for more to the people than to me.  We see this
abstraction in scholars, as a matter of course: but what a charm it
adds when observed in practical men.  Bonaparte, like Caesar, was
intellectual, and could look at every object for itself, without
affection.  Though an egotist _a l'outrance_, he could criticize a
play, a building, a character, on universal grounds, and give a just
opinion.  A man known to us only as a celebrity in politics or in
trade, gains largely in our esteem if we discover that he has some
intellectual taste or skill; as when we learn of Lord Fairfax, the
Long Parliament's general, his passion for antiquarian studies; or of
the French regicide Carnot, his sublime genius in mathematics; or of
a living banker, his success in poetry; or of a partisan journalist,
his devotion to ornithology.  So, if in travelling in the dreary
wildernesses of Arkansas or Texas, we should observe on the next seat
a man reading Horace, or Martial, or Calderon, we should wish to hug
him.  In callings that require roughest energy, soldiers,
sea-captains, and civil engineers sometimes betray a fine insight, if
only through a certain gentleness when off duty; a good-natured
admission that there are illusions, and who shall say that he is not
their sport?  We only vary the phrase, not the doctrine, when we say,
that culture opens the sense of beauty.  A man is a beggar who only
lives to the useful, and, however he may serve as a pin or rivet in
the social machine, cannot be said to have arrived at
self-possession.  I suffer, every day, from the want of perception of
beauty in people.  They do not know the charm with which all moments
and objects can be embellished, the charm of manners, of
self-command, of benevolence.  Repose and cheerfulness are the badge
of the gentleman, -- repose in energy.  The Greek battle-pieces are
calm; the heroes, in whatever violent actions engaged, retain a
serene aspect; as we say of Niagara, that it falls without speed.  A
cheerful, intelligent face is the end of culture, and success enough.
For it indicates the purpose of Nature and wisdom attained.

        When our higher faculties are in activity, we are domesticated,
and awkwardness and discomfort give place to natural and agreeable
movements.  It is noticed, that the consideration of the great
periods and spaces of astronomy induces a dignity of mind, and an
indifference to death.  The influence of fine scenery, the presence
of mountains, appeases our irritations and elevates our friendships.
Even a high dome, and the expansive interior of a cathedral, have a
sensible effect on manners.  I have heard that stiff people lose
something of their awkwardness under high ceilings, and in spacious
halls.  I think, sculpture and painting have an effect to teach us
manners, and abolish hurry.

        But, over all, culture must reinforce from higher influx the
empirical skills of eloquence, or of politics, or of trade, and the
useful arts.  There is a certain loftiness of thought and power to
marshal and adjust particulars, which can only come from an insight
of their whole connection.  The orator who has once seen things in
their divine order, will never quite lose sight of this, and will
come to affairs as from a higher ground, and, though he will say
nothing of philosophy, he will have a certain mastery in dealing with
them, and an incapableness of being dazzled or frighted, which will
distinguish his handling from that of attorneys and factors.  A man
who stands on a good footing with the heads of parties at Washington,
reads the rumors of the newspapers, and the guesses of provincial
politicians, with a key to the right and wrong in each statement, and
sees well enough where all this will end.  Archimedes will look
through your Connecticut machine, at a glance, and judge of its
fitness.  And much more, a wise man who knows not only what Plato,
but what Saint John can show him, can easily raise the affair he
deals with, to a certain majesty.  Plato says, Pericles owed this
elevation to the lessons of Anaxagoras.  Burke descended from a
higher sphere when he would influence human affairs.  Franklin,
Adams, Jefferson, Washington, stood on a fine humanity, before which
the brawls of modern senates are but pot-house politics.

        But there are higher secrets of culture, which are not for the
apprentices, but for proficients.  These are lessons only for the
brave.  We must know our friends under ugly masks.  The calamities
are our friends.  Ben Jonson specifies in his address to the Muse: --

        "Get him the time's long grudge, the court's ill-will,
        And, reconciled, keep him suspected still,
        Make him lose all his friends, and, what is worse,
        Almost all ways to any better course;
        With me thou leav'st a better Muse than thee,
        And which thou brought'st me, blessed Poverty."
 
        We wish to learn philosophy by rote, and play at heroism.  But
the wiser God says, Take the shame, the poverty, and the penal
solitude, that belong to truth-speaking.  Try the rough water as well
as the smooth.  Rough water can teach lessons worth knowing.  When
the state is unquiet, personal qualities are more than ever decisive.
Fear not a revolution which will constrain you to live five years in
one.  Don't be so tender at making an enemy now and then.  Be willing
to go to Coventry sometimes, and let the populace bestow on you their
coldest contempts.  The finished man of the world must eat of every
apple once.  He must hold his hatreds also at arm's length, and not
remember spite.  He has neither friends nor enemies, but values men
only as channels of power.

        He who aims high, must dread an easy home and popular manners.
Heaven sometimes hedges a rare character about with ungainliness and
odium, as the burr that protects the fruit.  If there is any great
and good thing in store for you, it will not come at the first or the
second call, nor in the shape of fashion, ease, and city
drawing-rooms.  Popularity is for dolls.  "Steep and craggy," said
Porphyry, "is the path of the gods." Open your Marcus Antoninus.  In
the opinion of the ancients, he was the great man who scorned to
shine, and who contested the frowns of fortune.  They preferred the
noble vessel too late for the tide, contending with winds and waves,
dismantled and unrigged, to her companion borne into harbor with
colors flying and guns firing.  There is none of the social goods
that may not be purchased too dear, and mere amiableness must not
take rank with high aims and self-subsistency.

        Bettine replies to Goethe's mother, who chides her disregard of
dress, -- "If I cannot do as I have a mind, in our poor Frankfort, I
shall not carry things far." And the youth must rate at its true mark
the inconceivable levity of local opinion.  The longer we live, the
more we must endure the elementary existence of men and women; and
every brave heart must treat society as a child, and never allow it
to dictate.

        "All that class of the severe and restrictive virtues," said
Burke, "are almost too costly for humanity." Who wishes to be severe?
Who wishes to resist the eminent and polite, in behalf of the poor,
and low, and impolite? and who that dares do it, can keep his temper
sweet, his frolic spirits?  The high virtues are not debonair, but
have their redress in being illustrious at last.  What forests of
laurel we bring, and the tears of mankind, to those who stood firm
against the opinion of their contemporaries!  The measure of a master
is his success in bringing all men round to his opinion twenty years
later.

        Let me say here, that culture cannot begin too early.  In
talking with scholars, I observe that they lost on ruder companions
those years of boyhood which alone could give imaginative literature
a religious and infinite quality in their esteem.  I find, too, that
the chance for appreciation is much increased by being the son of an
appreciator, and that these boys who now grow up are caught not only
years too late, but two or three births too late, to make the best
scholars of.  And I think it a presentable motive to a scholar, that,
as, in an old community, a well-born proprietor is usually found,
after the first heats of youth, to be a careful husband, and to feel
a habitual desire that the estate shall suffer no harm by his
administration, but shall be delivered down to the next heir in as
good condition as he received it; -- so, a considerate man will
reckon himself a subject of that secular melioration by which mankind
is mollified, cured, and refined, and will shun every expenditure of
his forces on pleasure or gain, which will jeopardize this social and
secular accumulation.

        The fossil strata show us that Nature began with rudimental
forms, and rose to the more complex, as fast as the earth was fit for
their dwelling-place; and that the lower perish, as the higher
appear.  Very few of our race can be said to be yet finished men.  We
still carry sticking to us some remains of the preceding inferior
quadruped organization.  We call these millions men; but they are not
yet men.  Half-engaged in the soil, pawing to get free, man needs all
the music that can be brought to disengage him.  If Love, red Love,
with tears and joy; if Want with his scourge; if War with his
cannonade; if Christianity with its charity; if Trade with its money;
if Art with its portfolios; if Science with her telegraphs through
the deeps of space and time; can set his dull nerves throbbing, and
by loud taps on the tough chrysalis, can break its walls, and let the
new creature emerge erect and free, -- make way, and sing paean!  The
age of the quadruped is to go out, -- the age of the brain and of the
heart is to come in.  The time will come when the evil forms we have
known can no more be organized.  Man's culture can spare nothing,
wants all the material.  He is to convert all impediments into
instruments, all enemies into power.  The formidable mischief will
only make the more useful slave.  And if one shall read the future of
the race hinted in the organic effort of Nature to mount and
meliorate, and the corresponding impulse to the Better in the human
being, we shall dare affirm that there is nothing he will not
overcome and convert, until at last culture shall absorb the chaos
and gehenna.  He will convert the Furies into Muses, and the hells
into benefit.

 
        V
 
        BEHAVIOR
 
        Grace, Beauty, and Caprice
        Build this golden portal;
        Graceful women, chosen men
        Dazzle every mortal:
        Their sweet and lofty countenance
        His enchanting food;
        He need not go to them, their forms
        Beset his solitude.
        He looketh seldom in their face,
        His eyes explore the ground,
        The green grass is a looking-glass
        Whereon their traits are found.
        Little he says to them,
        So dances his heart in his breast,
        Their tranquil mien bereaveth him
        Of wit, of words, of rest.
        Too weak to win, too fond to shun
        The tyrants of his doom,
        The much deceived Endymion
        Slips behind a tomb.

 
        _Behavior_

        The soul which animates Nature is not less sigshed in the
figure, movement, and gesture of animated bodies, than in its last
vehicle of articulate speech.  This silent and subtile language is
Manners; not _what_, but _how_.  Life expresses.  A statue has no
tongue, and needs none.  Good tableaux do not need declamation.
Nature tells every secret once.  Yes, but in man she tells it all the
time, by form, attitude, gesture, mien, face, and parts of the face,
and by the whole action of the machine.  The visible carriage or
action of the individual, as resulting from his organization and his
will combined, we call manners.  What are they but thought entering
the hands and feet, controlling the movements of the body, the speech
and behavior?

        There is always a best way of doing everything, if it be to
boil an egg.  Manners are the happy ways of doing things; each once a
stroke of genius or of love, -- now repeated and hardened into usage.
They form at last a rich varnish, with which the routine of life is
washed, and its details adorned.  If they are superficial, so are the
dew-drops which give such a depth to the morning meadows.  Manners
are very communicable: men catch them from each other.  Consuelo, in
the romance, boasts of the lessons she had given the nobles in
manners, on the stage; and, in real life, Talma taught Napoleon the
arts of behavior.  Genius invents fine manners, which the baron and
the baroness copy very fast, and, by the advantage of a palace,
better the instruction.  They stereotype the lesson they have learned
into a mode.

        The power of manners is incessant, -- an element as
unconcealable as fire.  The nobility cannot in any country be
disguised, and no more in a republic or a democracy, than in a
kingdom.  No man can resist their influence.  There are certain
manners which are learned in good society, of that force, that, if a
person have them, he or she must be considered, and is everywhere
welcome, though without beauty, or wealth, or genius.  Give a boy
address and accomplishments, and you give him the mastery of palaces
and fortunes where he goes.  He has not the trouble of earning or
owning them: they solicit him to enter and possess.  We send girls of
a timid, retreating disposition to the boarding-school, to the
riding-school, to the ballroom, or wheresoever they can come into
acquaintance and nearness of leading persons of their own sex; where
they might learn address, and see it near at hand.  The power of a
woman of fashion to lead, and also to daunt and repel, derives from
their belief that she knows resources and behaviors not known to
them; but when these have mastered her secret, they learn to confront
her, and recover their self-possession.

        Every day bears witness to their gentle rule.  People who would
obtrude, now do not obtrude.  The mediocre circle learns to demand
that which belongs to a high state of nature or of culture.  Your
manners are always under examination, and by committees little
suspected, -- a police in citizens' clothes, -- but are awarding or
denying you very high prizes when you least think of it.

        We talk much of utilities, -- but 'tis our manners that
associate us.  In hours of business, we go to him who knows, or has,
or does this or that which we want, and we do not let our taste or
feeling stand in the way.  But this activity over, we return to the
indolent state, and wish for those we can be at ease with; those who
will go where we go, whose manners do not offend us, whose social
tone chimes with ours.  When we reflect on their persuasive and
cheering force; how they recommend, prepare, and draw people
together; how, in all clubs, manners make the members; how manners
make the fortune of the ambitious youth; that, for the most part, his
manners marry him, and, for the most part, he marries manners; when
we think what keys they are, and to what secrets; what high lessons
and inspiring tokens of character they convey; and what divination is
required in us, for the reading of this fine telegraph, we see what
range the subject has, and what relations to convenience, power, and
beauty.

        Their first service is very low, -- when they are the minor
morals: but 'tis the beginning of civility, -- to make us, I mean,
endurable to each other.  We prize them for their rough-plastic,
abstergent force; to get people out of the quadruped state; to get
them washed, clothed, and set up on end; to slough their animal husks
and habits; compel them to be clean; overawe their spite and
meanness, teach them to stifle the base, and choose the generous
expression, and make them know how much happier the generous
behaviors are.

        Bad behavior the laws cannot reach.  Society is infested with
rude, cynical, restless, and frivolous persons who prey upon the
rest, and whom, a public opinion concentrated into good manners,
forms accepted by the sense of all, can reach: -- the contradictors
and railers at public and private tables, who are like terriers, who
conceive it the duty of a dog of honor to growl at any passer-by, and
do the honors of the house by barking him out of sight: -- I have
seen men who neigh like a horse when you contradict them, or say
something which they do not understand: -- then the overbold, who
make their own invitation to your hearth; the persevering talker, who
gives you his society in large, saturating doses; the pitiers of
themselves, -- a perilous class; the frivolous Asmodeus, who relies
on you to find him in ropes of sand to twist; the monotones; in
short, every stripe of absurdity; -- these are social inflictions
which the magistrate cannot cure or defend you from, and which must
be intrusted to the restraining force of custom, and proverbs, and
familiar rules of behavior impressed on young people in their
school-days.

        In the hotels on the banks of the Mississippi, they print, or
used to print, among the rules of the house, that "no gentleman can
be permitted to come to the public table without his coat;" and in
the same country, in the pews of the churches, little placards plead
with the worshipper against the fury of expectoration.  Charles
Dickens self-sacrificingly undertook the reformation of our American
manners in unspeakable particulars.  I think the lesson was not quite
lost; that it held bad manners up, so that the churls could see the
deformity.  Unhappily, the book had its own deformities.  It ought
not to need to print in a reading-room a caution to strangers not to
speak loud; nor to persons who look over fine engravings, that they
should be handled like cobwebs and butterflies' wings; nor to persons
who look at marble statues, that they shall not smite them with
canes.  But, even in the perfect civilization of this city, such
cautions are not quite needless in the Athenaeum and City Library.

        Manners are factitious, and grow out of circumstance as well as
out of character.  If you look at the pictures of patricians and of
peasants, of different periods and countries, you will see how well
they match the same classes in our towns.  The modern aristocrat not
only is well drawn in Titian's Venetian doges, and in Roman coins and
statues, but also in the pictures which Commodore Perry brought home
of dignitaries in Japan.  Broad lands and great interests not only
arrive to such heads as can manage them, but form manners of power.
A keen eye, too, will see nice gradations of rank, or see in the
manners the degree of homage the party is wont to receive.  A prince
who is accustomed every day to be courted and deferred to by the
highest grandees, acquires a corresponding expectation, and a
becoming mode of receiving and replying to this homage.

        There are always exceptional people and modes.  English
grandees affect to be farmers.  Claverhouse is a fop, and, under the
finish of dress, and levity of behavior, hides the terror of his war.
But Nature and Destiny are honest, and never fail to leave their
mark, to hang out a sign for each and for every quality.  It is much
to conquer one's face, and perhaps the ambitious youth thinks he has
got the whole secret when he has learned, that disengaged manners are
commanding.  Don't be deceived by a facile exterior.  Tender men
sometimes have strong wills.  We had, in Massachusetts, an old
statesman, who had sat all his life in courts and in chairs of state,
without overcoming an extreme irritability of face, voice, and
bearing: when he spoke, his voice would not serve him; it cracked, it
broke, it wheezed, it piped; -- little cared he; he knew that it had
got to pipe, or wheeze, or screech his argument and his indignation.
When he sat down, after speaking, he seemed in a sort of fit, and
held on to his chair with both hands: but underneath all this
irritability, was a puissant will, firm, and advancing, and a memory
in which lay in order and method like geologic strata every fact of
his history, and under the control of his will.

        Manners are partly factitious, but, mainly, there must be
capacity for culture in the blood.  Else all culture is vain.  The
obstinate prejudice in favor of blood, which lies at the base of the
feudal and monarchical fabrics of the old world, has some reason in
common experience.  Every man,-- mathematician, artist, soldier, or
merchant, -- looks with confidence for some traits and talents in his
own child, which he would not dare to presume in the child of a
stranger.  The Orientalists are very orthodox on this point.  "Take a
thorn-bush," said the emir Abdel-Kader, "and sprinkle it for a whole
year with water; -- it will yield nothing but thorns.  Take a
date-tree, leave it without culture, and it will always produce
dates.  Nobility is the date-tree, and the Arab populace is a bush of
thorns."

        A main fact in the history of manners is the wonderful
expressiveness of the human body.  If it were made of glass, or of
air, and the thoughts were written on steel tablets within, it could
not publish more truly its meaning than now.  Wise men read very
sharply all your private history in your look and gait and behavior.
The whole economy of nature is bent on expression.  The tell-tale
body is all tongues.  Men are like Geneva watches with crystal faces
which expose the whole movement.  They carry the liquor of life
flowing up and down in these beautiful bottles, and announcing to the
curious how it is with them.  The face and eyes reveal what the
spirit is doing, how old it is, what aims it has.  The eyes indicate
the antiquity of the soul, or, through how many forms it has already
ascended.  It almost violates the proprieties, if we say above the
breath here, what the confessing eyes do not hesitate to utter to
every street passenger.

        Man cannot fix his eye on the sun, and so far seems imperfect.
In Siberia, a late traveller found men who could see the satellites
of Jupiter with their unarmed eye.  In some respects the animals
excel us.  The birds have a longer sight, beside the advantage by
their wings of a higher observatory.  A cow can bid her calf, by
secret signal, probably of the eye, to run away, or to lie down and
hide itself.  The jockeys say of certain horses, that "they look over
the whole ground." The out-door life, and hunting, and labor, give
equal vigor to the human eye.  A farmer looks out at you as strong as
the horse; his eye-beam is like the stroke of a staff.  An eye can
threaten like a loaded and levelled gun, or can insult like hissing
or kicking; or, in its altered mood, by beams of kindness, it can
make the heart dance with joy.

        The eye obeys exactly the action of the mind.  When a thought
strikes us, the eyes fix, and remain gazing at a distance; in
enumerating the names of persons or of countries, as France, Germany,
Spain, Turkey, the eyes wink at each new name.  There is no nicety of
learning sought by the mind, which the eyes do not vie in acquiring.
"An artist," said Michel Angelo, "must have his measuring tools not
in the hand, but in the eye;" and there is no end to the catalogue of
its performances, whether in indolent vision, (that of health and
beauty,) or in strained vision, (that of art and labor.)

        Eyes are bold as lions, -- roving, running, leaping, here and
there, far and near.  They speak all languages.  They wait for no
introduction; they are no Englishmen; ask no leave of age, or rank;
they respect neither poverty nor riches, neither learning nor power,
nor virtue, nor sex, but intrude, and come again, and go through and
through you, in a moment of time.  What inundation of life and
thought is discharged from one soul into another, through them!  The
glance is natural magic.  The mysterious communication established
across a house between two entire strangers, moves all the springs of
wonder.  The communication by the glance is in the greatest part not
subject to the control of the will.  It is the bodily symbol of
identity of nature.  We look into the eyes to know if this other form
is another self, and the eyes will not lie, but make a faithful
confession what inhabitant is there.  The revelations are sometimes
terrific.  The confession of a low, usurping devil is there made, and
the observer shall seem to feel the stirring of owls, and bats, and
horned hoofs, where he looked for innocence and simplicity.  'Tis
remarkable, too, that the spirit that appears at the windows of the
house does at once invest himself in a new form of his own, to the
mind of the beholder.

        The eyes of men converse as much as their tongues, with the
advantage, that the ocular dialect needs no dictionary, but is
understood all the world over.  When the eyes say one thing, and the
tongue another, a practised man relies on the language of the first.
If the man is off his centre, the eyes show it.  You can read in the
eyes of your companion, whether your argument hits him, though his
tongue will not confess it.  There is a look by which a man shows he
is going to say a good thing, and a look when he has said it.  Vain
and forgotten are all the fine offers and offices of hospitality, if
there is no holiday in the eye.  How many furtive inclinations avowed
by the eye, though dissembled by the lips!  One comes away from a
company, in which, it may easily happen, he has said nothing, and no
important remark has been addressed to him, and yet, if in sympathy
with the society, he shall not have a sense of this fact, such a
stream of life has been flowing into him, and out from him, through
the eyes.  There are eyes, to be sure, that give no more admission
into the man than blueberries.  Others are liquid and deep, -- wells
that a man might fall into; -- others are aggressive and devouring,
seem to call out the police, take all too much notice, and require
crowded Broadways, and the security of millions, to protect
individuals against them.  The military eye I meet, now darkly
sparkling under clerical, now under rustic brows.  'Tis the city of
Lacedaemon; 'tis a stack of bayonets.  There are asking eyes,
asserting eyes, prowling eyes; and eyes full of fate, -- some of
good, and some of sinister omen.  The alleged power to charm down
insanity, or ferocity in beasts, is a power behind the eye.  It must
be a victory achieved in the will, before it can be signified in the
eye.  'Tis very certain that each man carries in his eye the exact
indication of his rank in the immense scale of men, and we are always
learning to read it.  A complete man should need no auxiliaries to
his personal presence.  Whoever looked on him would consent to his
will, being certified that his aims were generous and universal.  The
reason why men do not obey us, is because they see the mud at the
bottom of our eye.

        If the organ of sight is such a vehicle of power, the other
features have their own.  A man finds room in the few square inches
of the face for the traits of all his ancestors; for the expression
of all his history, and his wants.  The sculptor, and Winckelmann,
and Lavater, will tell you how significant a feature is the nose; how
its forms express strength or weakness of will, and good or bad
temper.  The nose of Julius Caesar, of Dante, and of Pitt, suggest
"the terrors of the beak." What refinement, and what limitations, the
teeth betray!  "Beware you don't laugh," said the wise mother, "for
then you show all your faults."

        Balzac left in manuscript a chapter, which he called "_Theorie
de la demarche_," in which he says: "The look, the voice, the
respiration, and the attitude or walk, are identical.  But, as it has
not been given to man, the power to stand guard, at once, over these
four different simultaneous expressions of his thought, watch that
one which speaks out the truth, and you will know the whole man."

        Palaces interest us mainly in the exhibition of manners, which,
in the idle and expensive society dwelling in them, are raised to a
high art.  The maxim of courts is, that manner is power.  A calm and
resolute bearing, a polished speech, an embellishment of trifles, and
the art of hiding all uncomfortable feeling, are essential to the
courtier: and Saint Simon, and Cardinal de Retz, and R;oederer, and
an encyclopaedia of _Memoires_, will instruct you, if you wish, in
those potent secrets.  Thus, it is a point of pride with kings, to
remember faces and names.  It is reported of one prince, that his
head had the air of leaning downwards, in order not to humble the
crowd.  There are people who come in ever like a child with a piece
of good news.  It was said of the late Lord Holland, that he always
came down to breakfast with the air of a man who had just met with
some signal good-fortune.  In "_Notre Dame_," the grandee took his
place on the dais, with the look of one who is thinking of something
else.  But we must not peep and eavesdrop at palace-doors.

        Fine manners need the support of fine manners in others.  A
scholar may be a well-bred man, or he may not.  The enthusiast is
introduced to polished scholars in society, and is chilled and
silenced by finding himself not in their element.  They all have
somewhat which he has not, and, it seems, ought to have.  But if he
finds the scholar apart from his companions, it is then the
enthusiast's turn, and the scholar has no defence, but must deal on
his terms.  Now they must fight the battle out on their private
strengths.  What is the talent of that character so common, -- the
successful man of the world, -- in all marts, senates, and
drawing-rooms?  Manners: manners of power; sense to see his
advantage, and manners up to it.  See him approach his man.  He knows
that troops behave as they are handled at first; -- that is his cheap
secret; just what happens to every two persons who meet on any
affair, -- one instantly perceives that he has the key of the
situation, that his will comprehends the other's will, as the cat
does the mouse; and he has only to use courtesy, and furnish
good-natured reasons to his victim to cover up the chain, lest he be
shamed into resistance.

        The theatre in which this science of manners has a formal
importance is not with us a court, but dress-circles, wherein, after
the close of the day's business, men and women meet at leisure, for
mutual entertainment, in ornamented drawing-rooms.  Of course, it has
every variety of attraction and merit; but, to earnest persons, to
youths or maidens who have great objects at heart, we cannot extol it
highly.  A well-dressed, talkative company, where each is bent to
amuse the other, -- yet the high-born Turk who came hither fancied
that every woman seemed to be suffering for a chair; that all the
talkers were brained and exhausted by the deoxygenated air: it
spoiled the best persons: it put all on stilts.  Yet here are the
secret biographies written and read.  The aspect of that man is
repulsive; I do not wish to deal with him.  The other is irritable,
shy, and on his guard.  The youth looks humble and manly: I choose
him.  Look on this woman.  There is not beauty, nor brilliant
sayings, nor distinguished power to serve you; but all see her
gladly; her whole air and impression are healthful.  Here come the
sentimentalists, and the invalids.  Here is Elise, who caught cold in
coming into the world, and has always increased it since.  Here are
creep-mouse manners; and thievish manners.  "Look at Northcote," said
Fuseli; "he looks like a rat that has seen a cat." In the shallow
company, easily excited, easily tired, here is the columnar Bernard:
the Alleghanies do not express more repose than his behavior.  Here
are the sweet following eyes of Cecile: it seemed always that she
demanded the heart.  Nothing can be more excellent in kind than the
Corinthian grace of Gertrude's manners, and yet Blanche, who has no
manners, has better manners than she; for the movements of Blanche
are the sallies of a spirit which is sufficient for the moment, and
she can afford to express every thought by instant action.

        Manners have been somewhat cynically defined to be a
contrivance of wise men to keep fools at a distance.  Fashion is
shrewd to detect those who do not belong to her train, and seldom
wastes her attentions.  Society is very swift in its instincts, and,
if you do not belong to it, resists and sneers at you; or quietly
drops you.  The first weapon enrages the party attacked; the second
is still more effective, but is not to be resisted, as the date of
the transaction is not easily found.  People grow up and grow old
under this infliction, and never suspect the truth, ascribing the
solitude which acts on them very injuriously, to any cause but the
right one.

        The basis of good manners is self-reliance.  Necessity is the
law of all who are not self-possessed.  Those who are not
self-possessed, obtrude, and pain us.  Some men appear to feel that
they belong to a Pariah caste.  They fear to offend, they bend and
apologize, and walk through life with a timid step.  As we sometimes
dream that we are in a well-dressed company without any coat, so
Godfrey acts ever as if he suffered from some mortifying
circumstance.  The hero should find himself at home, wherever he is:
should impart comfort by his own security and good-nature to all
beholders.  The hero is suffered to be himself.  A person of strong
mind comes to perceive that for him an immunity is secured so long as
he renders to society that service which is native and proper to him,
-- an immunity from all the observances, yea, and duties, which
society so tyrannically imposes on the rank and file of its members.
"Euripides," says Aspasia, "has not the fine manners of Sophocles;
but," -- she adds good-humoredly, "the movers and masters of our
souls have surely a right to throw out their limbs as carelessly as
they please, on the world that belongs to them, and before the
creatures they have animated." (*)

        (*) Landor: _Pericles and Aspasia_.

        Manners require time, as nothing is more vulgar than haste.
Friendship should be surrounded with ceremonies and respects, and not
crushed into corners.  Friendship requires more time than poor busy
men can usually command.  Here comes to me Roland, with a delicacy of
sentiment leading and inwrapping him like a divine cloud or holy
ghost.  'Tis a great destitution to both that this should not be
entertained with large leisures, but contrariwise should be balked by
importunate affairs.

        But through this lustrous varnish, the reality is ever shining.
'Tis hard to keep the _what_ from breaking through this pretty
painting of the _how_.  The core will come to the surface.  Strong
will and keen perception overpower old manners, and create new; and
the thought of the present moment has a greater value than all the
past.  In persons of character, we do not remark manners, because of
their instantaneousness.  We are surprised by the thing done, out of
all power to watch the way of it.  Yet nothing is more charming than
to recognize the great style which runs through the actions of such.
People masquerade before us in their fortunes, titles, offices, and
connections, as academic or civil presidents, or senators, or
professors, or great lawyers, and impose on the frivolous, and a good
deal on each other, by these fames.  At least, it is a point of
prudent good manners to treat these reputations tenderly, as if they
were merited.  But the sad realist knows these fellows at a glance,
and they know him; as when in Paris the chief of the police enters a
ballroom, so many diamonded pretenders shrink and make themselves as
inconspicuous as they can, or give him a supplicating look as they
pass.  "I had received," said a sibyl, "I had received at birth the
fatal gift of penetration:" -- and these Cassandras are always born.

        Manners impress as they indicate real power.  A man who is sure
of his point, carries a broad and contented expression, which
everybody reads.  And you cannot rightly train one to an air and
manner, except by making him the kind of man of whom that manner is
the natural expression.  Nature forever puts a premium on reality.
What is done for effect, is seen to be done for effect; what is done
for love, is felt to be done for love.  A man inspires affection and
honor, because he was not lying in wait for these.  The things of a
man for which we visit him, were done in the dark and the cold.  A
little integrity is better than any career.  So deep are the sources
of this surface-action, that even the size of your companion seems to
vary with his freedom of thought.  Not only is he larger, when at
ease, and his thoughts generous, but everything around him becomes
variable with expression.  No carpenter's rule, no rod and chain,
will measure the dimensions of any house or house-lot: go into the
house: if the proprietor is constrained and deferring, 'tis of no
importance how large his house, how beautiful his grounds, -- you
quickly come to the end of all: but if the man is self-possessed,
happy, and at home, his house is deep-founded, indefinitely large and
interesting, the roof and dome buoyant as the sky.  Under the
humblest roof, the commonest person in plain clothes sits there
massive, cheerful, yet formidable like the Egyptian colossi.

        Neither Aristotle, nor Leibnitz, nor Junius, nor Champollion
has set down the grammar-rules of this dialect, older than Sanscrit;
but they who cannot yet read English, can read this.  Men take each
other's measure, when they meet for the first time, -- and every time
they meet.  How do they get this rapid knowledge, even before they
speak, of each other's power and dispositions?  One would say, that
the persuasion of their speech is not in what they say, -- or, that
men do not convince by their argument, -- but by their personality,
by who they are, and what they said and did heretofore.  A man
already strong is listened to, and everything he says is applauded.
Another opposes him with sound argument, but the argument is scouted,
until by and by it gets into the mind of some weighty person; then it
begins to tell on the community.

        Self-reliance is the basis of behavior, as it is the guaranty
that the powers are not squandered in too much demonstration.  In
this country, where school education is universal, we have a
superficial culture, and a profusion of reading and writing and
expression.  We parade our nobilities in poems and orations, instead
of working them up into happiness.  There is a whisper out of the
ages to him who can understand it, -- `whatever is known to thyself
alone, has always very great value.' There is some reason to believe,
that, when a man does not write his poetry, it escapes by other vents
through him, instead of the one vent of writing; clings to his form
and manners, whilst poets have often nothing poetical about them
except their verses.  Jacobi said, that "when a man has fully
expressed his thought, he has somewhat less possession of it." One
would say, the rule is, -- What a man is irresistibly urged to say,
helps him and us.  In explaining his thought to others, he explains
it to himself: but when he opens it for show, it corrupts him.

        Society is the stage on which manners are shown; novels are
their literature.  Novels are the journal or record of manners; and
the new importance of these books derives from the fact, that the
novelist begins to penetrate the surface, and treat this part of life
more worthily.  The novels used to be all alike, and had a quite
vulgar tone.  The novels used to lead us on to a foolish interest in
the fortunes of the boy and girl they described.  The boy was to be
raised from a humble to a high position.  He was in want of a wife
and a castle, and the object of the story was to supply him with one
or both.  We watched sympathetically, step by step, his climbing,
until, at last, the point is gained, the wedding day is fixed, and we
follow the gala procession home to the castle, when the doors are
slammed in our face, and the poor reader is left outside in the cold,
not enriched by so much as an idea, or a virtuous impulse.

        But the victories of character are instant, and victories for
all.  Its greatness enlarges all.  We are fortified by every heroic
anecdote.  The novels are as useful as Bibles, if they teach you the
secret, that the best of life is conversation, and the greatest
success is confidence, or perfect understanding between sincere
people.  'Tis a French definition of friendship, _rien que
s'entendre_, good understanding.  The highest compact we can make
with our fellow, is, -- `Let there be truth between us two
forevermore.' That is the charm in all good novels, as it is the
charm in all good histories, that the heroes mutually understand,
from the first, and deal loyally, and with a profound trust in each
other.  It is sublime to feel and say of another, I need never meet,
or speak, or write to him: we need not reinforce ourselves, or send
tokens of remembrance: I rely on him as on myself: if he did thus or
thus, I know it was right.

        In all the superior people I have met, I notice directness,
truth spoken more truly, as if everything of obstruction, of
malformation, had been trained away.  What have they to conceal?
What have they to exhibit?  Between simple and noble persons, there
is always a quick intelligence: they recognize at sight, and meet on
a better ground than the talents and skills they may chance to
possess, namely, on sincerity and uprightness.  For, it is not what
talents or genius a man has, but how he is to his talents, that
constitutes friendship and character.  The man that stands by
himself, the universe stands by him also.  It is related of the monk
Basle, that, being excommunicated by the Pope, he was, at his death,
sent in charge of an angel to find a fit place of suffering in hell:
but, such was the eloquence and good-humor of the monk, that,
wherever he went he was received gladly, and civilly treated, even by
the most uncivil angels: and, when he came to discourse with them,
instead of contradicting or forcing him, they took his part, and
adopted his manners: and even good angels came from far, to see him,
and take up their abode with him.  The angel that was sent to find a
place of torment for him, attempted to remove him to a worse pit, but
with no better success; for such was the contented spirit of the
monk, that he found something to praise in every place and company,
though in hell, and made a kind of heaven of it.  At last the
escorting angel returned with his prisoner to them that sent him,
saying, that no phlegethon could be found that would burn him; for
that, in whatever condition, Basle remained incorrigibly Basle.  The
legend says, his sentence was remitted, and he was allowed to go into
heaven, and was canonized as a saint.

        There is a stroke of magnanimity in the correspondence of
Bonaparte with his brother Joseph, when the latter was King of Spain,
and complained that he missed in Napoleon's letters the affectionate
tone which had marked their childish correspondence.  "I am sorry,"
replies Napoleon, "you think you shall find your brother again only
in the Elysian Fields.  It is natural, that at forty, he should not
feel towards you as he did at twelve.  But his feelings towards you
have greater truth and strength.  His friendship has the features of
his mind."

        How much we forgive to those who yield us the rare spectacle of
heroic manners!  We will pardon them the want of books, of arts, and
even of the gentler virtues.  How tenaciously we remember them!  Here
is a lesson which I brought along with me in boyhood from the Latin
School, and which ranks with the best of Roman anecdotes.  Marcus
Scaurus was accused by Quintus Varius Hispanus, that he had excited
the allies to take arms against the Republic.  But he, full of
firmness and gravity, defended himself in this manner: "Quintus
Varius Hispanus alleges that Marcus Scaurus, President of the Senate,
excited the allies to arms: Marcus Scaurus, President of the Senate,
denies it.  There is no witness.  Which do you believe, Romans?"
_"Utri creditis, Quirites?"_ When he had said these words, he was
absolved by the assembly of the people.

        I have seen manners that make a similar impression with
personal beauty; that give the like exhilaration, and refine us like
that; and, in memorable experiences, they are suddenly better than
beauty, and make that superfluous and ugly.  But they must be marked
by fine perception, the acquaintance with real beauty.  They must
always show self-control: you shall not be facile, apologetic, or
leaky, but king over your word; and every gesture and action shall
indicate power at rest.  Then they must be inspired by the good
heart.  There is no beautifier of complexion, or form, or behavior,
like the wish to scatter joy and not pain around us.  'Tis good to
give a stranger a meal, or a night's lodging.  'Tis better to be
hospitable to his good meaning and thought, and give courage to a
companion.  We must be as courteous to a man as we are to a picture,
which we are willing to give the advantage of a good light.  Special
precepts are not to be thought of: the talent of well-doing contains
them all.  Every hour will show a duty as paramount as that of my
whim just now; and yet I will write it, -- that there is one topic
peremptorily forbidden to all well-bred, to all rational mortals,
namely, their distempers.  If you have not slept, or if you have
slept, or if you have headache, or sciatica, or leprosy, or
thunder-stroke, I beseech you, by all angels, to hold your peace, and
not pollute the morning, to which all the housemates bring serene and
pleasant thoughts, by corruption and groans.  Come out of the azure.
Love the day.  Do not leave the sky out of your landscape.  The
oldest and the most deserving person should come very modestly into
any newly awaked company, respecting the divine communications, out
of which all must be presumed to have newly come.  An old man who
added an elevating culture to a large experience of life, said to me,
"When you come into the room, I think I will study how to make
humanity beautiful to you."

        As respects the delicate question of culture, I do not think
that any other than negative rules can be laid down.  For positive
rules, for suggestion, Nature alone inspires it.  Who dare assume to
guide a youth, a maid, to perfect manners? -- the golden mean is so
delicate, difficult, -- say frankly, unattainable.  What finest hands
would not be clumsy to sketch the genial precepts of the young girl's
demeanor?  The chances seem infinite against success; and yet success
is continually attained.  There must not be secondariness, and 'tis a
thousand to one that her air and manner will at once betray that she
is not primary, but that there is some other one or many of her
class, to whom she habitually postpones herself.  But Nature lifts
her easily, and without knowing it, over these impossibilities, and
we are continually surprised with graces and felicities not only
unteachable, but undescribable.

        VI
 
        WORSHIP
 
        This is he, who, felled by foes,
        Sprung harmless up, refreshed by blows:
        He to captivity was sold,
        But him no prison-bars would hold:
        Though they sealed him in a rock,
        Mountain chains he can unlock:
        Thrown to lions for their meat,
        The crouching lion kissed his feet:
        Bound to the stake, no flames appalled,
        But arched o'er him an honoring vault.
        This is he men miscall Fate,
        Threading dark ways, arriving late,
        But ever coming in time to crown
        The truth, and hurl wrongdoers down.
        He is the oldest, and best known,
        More near than aught thou call'st thy own,
        Yet, greeted in another's eyes,
        Disconcerts with glad surprise.
        This is Jove, who, deaf to prayers,
        Floods with blessings unawares.
        Draw, if thou canst, the mystic line,
        Severing rightly his from thine,
        Which is human, which divine.

 
        _Worship_

        Some of my friends have complained, when the preceding papers
were read, that we discussed Fate, Power, and Wealth, on too low a
platform; gave too much line to the evil spirit of the times; too
many cakes to Cerberus; that we ran Cudworth's risk of making, by
excess of candor, the argument of atheism so strong, that he could
not answer it.  I have no fears of being forced in my own despite to
play, as we say, the devil's attorney.  I have no infirmity of faith;
no belief that it is of much importance what I or any man may say: I
am sure that a certain truth will be said through me, though I should
be dumb, or though I should try to say the reverse.  Nor do I fear
skepticism for any good soul.  A just thinker will allow full swing
to his skepticism.  I dip my pen in the blackest ink, because I am
not afraid of falling into my inkpot.  I have no sympathy with a poor
man I knew, who, when suicides abounded, told me he dared not look at
his razor.  We are of different opinions at different hours, but we
always may be said to be at heart on the side of truth.

        I see not why we should give ourselves such sanctified airs.
If the Divine Providence has hid from men neither disease, nor
deformity, nor corrupt society, but has stated itself out in
passions, in war, in trade, in the love of power and pleasure, in
hunger and need, in tyrannies, literatures, and arts, -- let us not
be so nice that we cannot write these facts down coarsely as they
stand, or doubt but there is a counter-statement as ponderous, which
we can arrive at, and which, being put, will make all square.  The
solar system has no anxiety about its reputation, and the credit of
truth and honesty is as safe; nor have I any fear that a skeptical
bias can be given by leaning hard on the sides of fate, of practical
power, or of trade, which the doctrine of Faith cannot down-weigh.
The strength of that principle is not measured in ounces and pounds:
it tyrannizes at the centre of Nature.  We may well give skepticism
as much line as we can.  The spirit will return, and fill us.  It
drives the drivers.  It counterbalances any accumulations of power.
 
 
        "Heaven kindly gave our blood a moral flow."
 
        We are born loyal.  The whole creation is made of hooks and
eyes, of bitumen, of sticking-plaster, and whether your community is
made in Jerusalem or in California, of saints or of wreckers, it
coheres in a perfect ball.  Men as naturally make a state, or a
church, as caterpillars a web.  If they were more refined, it would
be less formal, it would be nervous, like that of the Shakers, who,
from long habit of thinking and feeling together, it is said, are
affected in the same way, at the same time, to work and to play, and
as they go with perfect sympathy to their tasks in the field or shop,
so are they inclined for a ride or a journey at the same instant, and
the horses come up with the family carriage unbespoken to the door.

        We are born believing.  A man bears beliefs, as a tree bears
apples.  A self-poise belongs to every particle; and a rectitude to
every mind, and is the Nemesis and protector of every society.  I and
my neighbors have been bred in the notion, that, unless we came soon
to some good church, -- Calvinism, or Behmenism, or Romanism, or
Mormonism, -- there would be a universal thaw and dissolution.  No
Isaiah or Jeremy has arrived.  Nothing can exceed the anarchy that
has followed in our skies.  The stern old faiths have all pulverized.
'Tis a whole population of gentlemen and ladies out in search of
religions.  'Tis as flat anarchy in our ecclesiastic realms, as that
which existed in Massachusetts, in the Revolution, or which prevails
now on the slope of the Rocky Mountains or Pike's Peak.  Yet we make
shift to live.  Men are loyal.  Nature has self-poise in all her
works; certain proportions in which oxygen and azote combine, and,
not less a harmony in faculties, a fitness in the spring and the
regulator.

        The decline of the influence of Calvin, or Fenelon, or Wesley,
or Channing, need give us no uneasiness.  The builder of heaven has
not so ill constructed his creature as that the religion, that is,
the public nature, should fall out: the public and the private
element, like north and south, like inside and outside, like
centrifugal and centripetal, adhere to every soul, and cannot be
subdued, except the soul is dissipated.  God builds his temple in the
heart on the ruins of churches and religions.

 
        In the last chapters, we treated some particulars of the
question of culture.  But the whole state of man is a state of
culture; and its flowering and completion may be described as
Religion, or Worship.  There is always some religion, some hope and
fear extended into the invisible, -- from the blind boding which
nails a horseshoe to the mast or the threshold, up to the song of the
Elders in the Apocalypse.  But the religion cannot rise above the
state of the votary.  Heaven always bears some proportion to earth.
The god of the cannibals will be a cannibal, of the crusaders a
crusader, and of the merchants a merchant.  In all ages, souls out of
time, extraordinary, prophetic, are born, who are rather related to
the system of the world, than to their particular age and locality.
These announce absolute truths, which, with whatever reverence
received, are speedily dragged down into a savage interpretation.
The interior tribes of our Indians, and some of the Pacific
islanders, flog their gods, when things take an unfavorable turn.
The Greek poets did not hesitate to let loose their petulant wit on
their deities also.  Laomedon, in his anger at Neptune and Apollo,
who had built Troy for him, and demanded their price, does not
hesitate to menace them that he will cut their ears off.  (*) Among
our Norse forefathers, King Olaf's mode of converting Eyvind to
Christianity was to put a pan of glowing coals on his belly, which
burst asunder.  "Wilt thou now, Eyvind, believe in Christ?" asks
Olaf, in excellent faith.  Another argument was an adder put into the
mouth of the reluctant disciple Rand, who refused to believe.

        (*) Iliad, Book xxi. l. 455.

        Christianity, in the romantic ages, signified European culture,
-- the grafted or meliorated tree in a crab forest.  And to marry a
pagan wife or husband, was to marry Beast, and voluntarily to take a
step backwards towards the baboon.
 
        "Hengist had verament
        A daughter both fair and gent,
        But she was heathen Sarazine,
        And Vortigern for love fine
        Her took to fere and to wife,
        And was cursed in all his life;
        For he let Christian wed heathen,
        And mixed our blood as flesh and worms."

        What Gothic mixtures the Christian creed drew from the pagan
sources, Richard of Devizes's chronicle of Richard I.'s crusade, in
the twelfth century, may show.  King Richard taunts God with
forsaking him: "O fie!  O how unwilling should I be to forsake thee,
in so forlorn and dreadful a position, were I thy lord and advocate,
as thou art mine.  In sooth, my standards will in future be despised,
not through my fault, but through thine: in sooth, not through any
cowardice of my warfare, art thou thyself, my king and my God
conquered, this day, and not Richard thy vassal." The religion of the
early English poets is anomalous, so devout and so blasphemous, in
the same breath.  Such is Chaucer's extraordinary confusion of heaven
and earth in the picture of Dido.

        "She was so fair,
        So young, so lusty, with her eyen glad,
        That if that God that heaven and earthe made
        Would have a love for beauty and goodness,
        And womanhede, truth, and seemliness,
        Whom should he loven but this lady sweet?
        There n' is no woman to him half so meet."

        With these grossnesses, we complacently compare our own taste
and decorum.  We think and speak with more temperance and gradation,
-- but is not indifferentism as bad as superstition?

        We live in a transition period, when the old faiths which
comforted nations, and not only so, but made nations, seem to have
spent their force.  I do not find the religions of men at this moment
very creditable to them, but either childish and insignificant, or
unmanly and effeminating.  The fatal trait is the divorce between
religion and morality.  Here are know-nothing religions, or churches
that proscribe intellect; scortatory religions; slave-holding and
slave-trading religions; and, even in the decent populations,
idolatries wherein the whiteness of the ritual covers scarlet
indulgence.  The lover of the old religion complains that our
contemporaries, scholars as well as merchants, succumb to a great
despair, -- have corrupted into a timorous conservatism, and believe
in nothing.  In our large cities, the population is godless,
materialized, -- no bond, no fellow-feeling, no enthusiasm.  These
are not men, but hungers, thirsts, fevers, and appetites walking.
How is it people manage to live on, -- so aimless as they are?  After
their peppercorn aims are gained, it seems as if the lime in their
bones alone held them together, and not any worthy purpose.  There is
no faith in the intellectual, none in the moral universe.  There is
faith in chemistry, in meat, and wine, in wealth, in machinery, in
the steam-engine, galvanic battery, turbine-wheels, sewing machines,
and in public opinion, but not in divine causes.  A silent revolution
has loosed the tension of the old religious sects, and, in place of
the gravity and permanence of those societies of opinion, they run
into freak and extravagance.  In creeds never was such levity;
witness the heathenisms in Christianity, the periodic "revivals," the
Millennium mathematics, the peacock ritualism, the retrogression to
Popery, the maundering of Mormons, the squalor of Mesmerism, the
deliration of rappings, the rat and mouse revelation, thumps in
table-drawers, and black art.  The architecture, the music, the
prayer, partake of the madness: the arts sink into shift and
make-believe.  Not knowing what to do, we ape our ancestors; the
churches stagger backward to the mummeries of the dark ages.  By the
irresistible maturing of the general mind, the Christian traditions
have lost their hold.  The dogma of the mystic offices of Christ
being dropped, and he standing on his genius as a moral teacher, 'tis
impossible to maintain the old emphasis of his personality; and it
recedes, as all persons must, before the sublimity of the moral laws.
From this change, and in the momentary absence of any religious
genius that could offset the immense material activity, there is a
feeling that religion is gone.  When Paul Leroux offered his article
_"Dieu"_ to the conductor of a leading French journal, he replied,
_"La question de Dieu manque d'actualite."_ In Italy, Mr. Gladstone
said of the late King of Naples, "it has been a proverb, that he has
erected the negation of God into a system of government." In this
country, the like stupefaction was in the air, and the phrase "higher
law" became a political jibe.  What proof of infidelity, like the
toleration and propagandism of slavery?  What, like the direction of
education?  What, like the facility of conversion?  What, like the
externality of churches that once sucked the roots of right and
wrong, and now have perished away till they are a speck of whitewash
on the wall?  What proof of skepticism like the base rate at which
the highest mental and moral gifts are held?  Let a man attain the
highest and broadest culture that any American has possessed, then
let him die by sea-storm, railroad collision, or other accident, and
all America will acquiesce that the best thing has happened to him;
that, after the education has gone far, such is the expensiveness of
America, that the best use to put a fine person to, is, to drown him
to save his board.

        Another scar of this skepticism is the distrust in human
virtue.  It is believed by well-dressed proprietors that there is no
more virtue than they possess; that the solid portion of society
exist for the arts of comfort: that life is an affair to put somewhat
between the upper and lower mandibles.  How prompt the suggestion of
a low motive!  Certain patriots in England devoted themselves for
years to creating a public opinion that should break down the
corn-laws and establish free trade.  `Well,' says the man in the
street, `Cobden got a stipend out of it.' Kossuth fled hither across
the ocean to try if he could rouse the New World to a sympathy with
European liberty.  `Aye,' says New York, `he made a handsome thing of
it, enough to make him comfortable for life.'

        See what allowance vice finds in the respectable and
well-conditioned class.  If a pickpocket intrude into the society of
gentlemen, they exert what moral force they have, and he finds
himself uncomfortable, and glad to get away.  But if an adventurer go
through all the forms, procure himself to be elected to a post of
trust, as of senator, or president, -- though by the same arts as we
detest in the house-thief, -- the same gentlemen who agree to
discountenance the private rogue, will be forward to show civilities
and marks of respect to the public one: and no amount of evidence of
his crimes will prevent them giving him ovations, complimentary
dinners, opening their own houses to him, and priding themselves on
his acquaintance.  We were not deceived by the professions of the
private adventurer, -- the louder he talked of his honor, the faster
we counted our spoons; but we appeal to the sanctified preamble of
the messages and proclamations of the public sinner, as the proof of
sincerity.  It must be that they who pay this homage have said to
themselves, On the whole, we don't know about this that you call
honesty; a bird in the hand is better.

        Even well-disposed, good sort of people are touched with the
same infidelity, and for brave, straightforward action, use
half-measures and compromises.  Forgetful that a little measure is a
great error, forgetful that a wise mechanic uses a sharp tool, they
go on choosing the dead men of routine.  But the official men can in
nowise help you in any question of to-day, they deriving entirely
from the old dead things.  Only those can help in counsel or conduct
who did not make a party pledge to defend this or that, but who were
appointed by God Almighty, before they came into the world, to stand
for this which they uphold.

        It has been charged that a want of sincerity in the leading men
is a vice general throughout American society.  But the multitude of
the sick shall not make us deny the existence of health.  In spite of
our imbecility and terrors, and "universal decay of religion," &c.
&c., the moral sense reappears to-day with the same morning newness
that has been from of old the fountain of beauty and strength.  You
say, there is no religion now.  'Tis like saying in rainy weather,
there is no sun, when at that moment we are witnessing one of his
superlative effects.  The religion of the cultivated class now, to be
sure, consists in an avoidance of acts and engagements which it was
once their religion to assume.  But this avoidance will yield
spontaneous forms in their due hour.  There is a principle which is
the basis of things, which all speech aims to say, and all action to
evolve, a simple, quiet, undescribed, undescribable presence,
dwelling very peacefully in us, our rightful lord: we are not to do,
but to let do; not to work, but to be worked upon; and to this homage
there is a consent of all thoughtful and just men in all ages and
conditions.  To this sentiment belong vast and sudden enlargements of
power.  'Tis remarkable that our faith in ecstasy consists with total
inexperience of it.  It is the order of the world to educate with
accuracy the senses and the understanding; and the enginery at work
to draw out these powers in priority, no doubt, has its office.  But
we are never without a hint that these powers are mediate and
servile, and that we are one day to deal with real being, -- essences
with essences.  Even the fury of material activity has some results
friendly to moral health.  The energetic action of the times develops
individualism, and the religious appear isolated.  I esteem this a
step in the right direction.  Heaven deals with us on no
representative system.  Souls are not saved in bundles.  The Spirit
saith to the man, `How is it with thee? thee personally? is it well?
is it ill?' For a great nature, it is a happiness to escape a
religious training, -- religion of character is so apt to be invaded.
Religion must always be a crab fruit: it cannot be grafted and keep
its wild beauty.  "I have seen," said a traveller who had known the
extremes of society, "I have seen human nature in all its forms, it
is everywhere the same, but the wilder it is, the more virtuous."

        We say, the old forms of religion decay, and that a skepticism
devastates the community.  I do not think it can be cured or stayed
by any modification of theologic creeds, much less by theologic
discipline.  The cure for false theology is motherwit.  Forget your
books and traditions, and obey your moral perceptions at this hour.
That which is signified by the words "moral" and "spiritual," is a
lasting essence, and, with whatever illusions we have loaded them,
will certainly bring back the words, age after age, to their ancient
meaning.  I know no words that mean so much.  In our definitions, we
grope after the _spiritual_ by describing it as invisible.  The true
meaning of _spiritual_ is _real_; that law which executes itself,
which works without means, and which cannot be conceived as not
existing.  Men talk of "mere morality," -- which is much as if one
should say, `poor God, with nobody to help him.' I find the
omnipresence and the almightiness in the reaction of every atom in
Nature.  I can best indicate by examples those reactions by which
every part of Nature replies to the purpose of the actor, --
beneficently to the good, penally to the bad.  Let us replace
sentimentalism by realism, and dare to uncover those simple and
terrible laws which, be they seen or unseen, pervade and govern.

        Every man takes care that his neighbor shall not cheat him.
But a day comes when he begins to care that he do not cheat his
neighbor.  Then all goes well.  He has changed his market-cart into a
chariot of the sun.  What a day dawns, when we have taken to heart
the doctrine of faith! to prefer, as a better investment, being to
doing; being to seeming; logic to rhythm and to display; the year to
the day; the life to the year; character to performance; -- and have
come to know, that justice will be done us; and, if our genius is
slow, the term will be long.

        'Tis certain that worship stands in some commanding relation to
the health of man, and to his highest powers, so as to be, in some
manner, the source of intellect.  All the great ages have been ages
of belief.  I mean, when there was any extraordinary power of
performance, when great national movements began, when arts appeared,
when heroes existed, when poems were made, the human soul was in
earnest, and had fixed its thoughts on spiritual verities, with as
strict a grasp as that of the hands on the sword, or the pencil, or
the trowel.  It is true that genius takes its rise out of the
mountains of rectitude; that all beauty and power which men covet,
are somehow born out of that Alpine district; that any extraordinary
degree of beauty in man or woman involves a moral charm.  Thus, I
think, we very slowly admit in another man a higher degree of moral
sentiment than our own, -- a finer conscience, more impressionable,
or, which marks minuter degrees; an ear to hear acuter notes of right
and wrong, than we can.  I think we listen suspiciously and very
slowly to any evidence to that point.  But, once satisfied of such
superiority, we set no limit to our expectation of his genius.  For
such persons are nearer to the secret of God than others; are bathed
by sweeter waters; they hear notices, they see visions, where others
are vacant.  We believe that holiness confers a certain insight,
because not by our private, but by our public force, can we share and
know the nature of things.

        There is an intimate interdependence of intellect and morals.
Given the equality of two intellects, -- which will form the most
reliable judgments, the good, or the bad hearted?  "The heart has its
arguments, with which the understanding is not acquainted." For the
heart is at once aware of the state of health or disease, which is
the controlling state, that is, of sanity or of insanity, prior, of
course, to all question of the ingenuity of arguments, the amount of
facts, or the elegance of rhetoric.  So intimate is this alliance of
mind and heart, that talent uniformly sinks with character.  The bias
of errors of principle carries away men into perilous courses, as
soon as their will does not control their passion or talent.  Hence
the extraordinary blunders, and final wrong head, into which men
spoiled by ambition usually fall.  Hence the remedy for all blunders,
the cure of blindness, the cure of crime, is love.  "As much love, so
much mind," said the Latin proverb.  The superiority that has no
superior; the redeemer and instructor of souls, as it is their primal
essence, is love.

        The moral must be the measure of health.  If your eye is on the
eternal, your intellect will grow, and your opinions and actions will
have a beauty which no learning or combined advantages of other men
can rival.  The moment of your loss of faith, and acceptance of the
lucrative standard, will be marked in the pause, or solstice of
genius, the sequent retrogression, and the inevitable loss of
attraction to other minds.  The vulgar are sensible of the change in
you, and of your descent, though they clap you on the back, and
congratulate you on your increased common sense.

        Our recent culture has been in natural science.  We have
learned the manners of the sun and of the moon, of the rivers and the
rains, of the mineral and elemental kingdoms, of plants and animals.
Man has learned to weigh the sun, and its weight neither loses nor
gains.  The path of a star, the moment of an eclipse, can be
determined to the fraction of a second.  Well, to him the book of
history, the book of love, the lures of passion, and the commandments
of duty are opened: and the next lesson taught, is, the continuation
of the inflexible law of matter into the subtile kingdom of will, and
of thought; that, if, in sidereal ages, gravity and projection keep
their craft, and the ball never loses its way in its wild path
through space, -- a secreter gravitation, a secreter projection, rule
not less tyrannically in human history, and keep the balance of power
from age to age unbroken.  For, though the new element of freedom and
an individual has been admitted, yet the primordial atoms are
prefigured and predetermined to moral issues, are in search of
justice, and ultimate right is done.  Religion or worship is the
attitude of those who see this unity, intimacy, and sincerity; who
see that, against all appearances, the nature of things works for
truth and right forever.

        'Tis a short sight to limit our faith in laws to those of
gravity, of chemistry, of botany, and so forth.  Those laws do not
stop where our eyes lose them, but push the same geometry and
chemistry up into the invisible plane of social and rational life, so
that, look where we will, in a boy's game, or in the strifes of
races, a perfect reaction, a perpetual judgment keeps watch and ward.
And this appears in a class of facts which concerns all men, within
and above their creeds.

        Shallow men believe in luck, believe in circumstances: It was
somebody's name, or he happened to be there at the time, or, it was
so then, and another day it would have been otherwise.  Strong men
believe in cause and effect.  The man was born to do it, and his
father was born to be the father of him and of this deed, and, by
looking narrowly, you shall see there was no luck in the matter, but
it was all a problem in arithmetic, or an experiment in chemistry.
The curve of the flight of the moth is preordained, and all things go
by number, rule, and weight.

        Skepticism is unbelief in cause and effect.  A man does not
see, that, as he eats, so he thinks: as he deals, so he is, and so he
appears; he does not see, that his son is the son of his thoughts and
of his actions; that fortunes are not exceptions but fruits; that
relation and connection are not somewhere and sometimes, but
everywhere and always; no miscellany, no exemption, no anomaly, --
but method, and an even web; and what comes out, that was put in.  As
we are, so we do; and as we do, so is it done to us; we are the
builders of our fortunes; cant and lying and the attempt to secure a
good which does not belong to us, are, once for all, balked and vain.
But, in the human mind, this tie of fate is made alive.  The law is
the basis of the human mind.  In us, it is inspiration; out there in
Nature, we see its fatal strength.  We call it the moral sentiment.

        We owe to the Hindoo Scriptures a definition of Law, which
compares well with any in our Western books.  "Law it is, which is
without name, or color, or hands, or feet; which is smallest of the
least, and largest of the large; all, and knowing all things; which
hears without ears, sees without eyes, moves without feet, and seizes
without hands."

        If any reader tax me with using vague and traditional phrases,
let me suggest to him, by a few examples, what kind of a trust this
is, and how real.  Let me show him that the dice are loaded; that the
colors are fast, because they are the native colors of the fleece;
that the globe is a battery, because every atom is a magnet; and that
the police and sincerity of the Universe are secured by God's
delegating his divinity to every particle; that there is no room for
hypocrisy, no margin for choice.

        The countryman leaving his native village, for the first time,
and going abroad, finds all his habits broken up.  In a new nation
and language, his sect, as Quaker, or Lutheran, is lost.  What! it is
not then necessary to the order and existence of society?  He misses
this, and the commanding eye of his neighborhood, which held him to
decorum.  This is the peril of New York, of New Orleans, of London,
of Paris, to young men.  But after a little experience, he makes the
discovery that there are no large cities, -- none large enough to
hide in; that the censors of action are as numerous and as near in
Paris, as in Littleton or Portland; that the gossip is as prompt and
vengeful.  There is no concealment, and, for each offence, a several
vengeance; that, reaction, or _nothing for nothing_, or, _things are
as broad as they are long_, is not a rule for Littleton or Portland,
but for the Universe.

        We cannot spare the coarsest muniment of virtue.  We are
disgusted by gossip; yet it is of importance to keep the angels in
their proprieties.  The smallest fly will draw blood, and gossip is a
weapon impossible to exclude from the privatest, highest, selectest.
Nature created a police of many ranks.  God has delegated himself to
a million deputies.  From these low external penalties, the scale
ascends.  Next come the resentments, the fears, which injustice calls
out; then, the false relations in which the offender is put to other
men; and the reaction of his fault on himself, in the solitude and
devastation of his mind.

        You cannot hide any secret.  If the artist succor his flagging
spirits by opium or wine, his work will characterize itself as the
effect of opium or wine.  If you make a picture or a statue, it sets
the beholder in that state of mind you had, when you made it.  If you
spend for show, on building, or gardening, or on pictures, or on
equipages, it will so appear.  We are all physiognomists and
penetrators of character, and things themselves are detective.  If
you follow the suburban fashion in building a sumptuous-looking house
for a little money, it will appear to all eyes as a cheap dear house.
There is no privacy that cannot be penetrated.  No secret can be kept
in the civilized world.  Society is a masked ball, where every one
hides his real character, and reveals it by hiding.  If a man wish to
conceal anything he carries, those whom he meets know that he
conceals somewhat, and usually know what he conceals.  Is it
otherwise if there be some belief or some purpose he would bury in
his breast?  'Tis as hard to hide as fire.  He is a strong man who
can hold down his opinion.  A man cannot utter two or three
sentences, without disclosing to intelligent ears precisely where he
stands in life and thought, namely, whether in the kingdom of the
senses and the understanding, or, in that of ideas and imagination,
in the realm of intuitions and duty.  People seem not to see that
their opinion of the world is also a confession of character.  We can
only see what we are, and if we misbehave we suspect others.  The
fame of Shakspeare or of Voltaire, of Thomas a Kempis, or of
Bonaparte, characterizes those who give it.  As gas-light is found to
be the best nocturnal police, so the universe protects itself by
pitiless publicity.

        Each must be armed -- not necessarily with musket and pike.
Happy, if, seeing these, he can feel that he has better muskets and
pikes in his energy and constancy.  To every creature is his own
weapon, however skilfully concealed from himself, a good while.  His
work is sword and shield.  Let him accuse none, let him injure none.
The way to mend the bad world, is to create the right world.  Here is
a low political economy plotting to cut the throat of foreign
competition, and establish our own; -- excluding others by force, or
making war on them; or, by cunning tariffs, giving preference to
worse wares of ours.  But the real and lasting victories are those of
peace, and not of war.  The way to conquer the foreign artisan, is,
not to kill him, but to beat his work.  And the Crystal Palaces and
World Fairs, with their committees and prizes on all kinds of
industry, are the result of this feeling.  The American workman who
strikes ten blows with his hammer, whilst the foreign workman only
strikes one, is as really vanquishing that foreigner, as if the blows
were aimed at and told on his person.  I look on that man as happy,
who, when there is question of success, looks into his work for a
reply, not into the market, not into opinion, not into patronage.  In
every variety of human employment, in the mechanical and in the fine
arts, in navigation, in farming, in legislating, there are among the
numbers who do their task perfunctorily, as we say, or just to pass,
and as badly as they dare, -- there are the working-men, on whom the
burden of the business falls, -- those who love work, and love to see
it rightly done, who finish their task for its own sake; and the
state and the world is happy, that has the most of such finishers.
The world will always do justice at last to such finishers: it cannot
otherwise.  He who has acquired the ability, may wait securely the
occasion of making it felt and appreciated, and know that it will not
loiter.  Men talk as if victory were something fortunate.  Work is
victory.  Wherever work is done, victory is obtained.  There is no
chance, and no blanks.  You want but one verdict: if you have your
own, you are secure of the rest.  And yet, if witnesses are wanted,
witnesses are near.  There was never a man born so wise or good, but
one or more companions came into the world with him, who delight in
his faculty, and report it.  I cannot see without awe, that no man
thinks alone, and no man acts alone, but the divine assessors who
came up with him into life, -- now under one disguise, now under
another, -- like a police in citizens' clothes, walk with him, step
for step, through all the kingdom of time.

        This reaction, this sincerity is the property of all things.
To make our word or act sublime, we must make it real.  It is our
system that counts, not the single word or unsupported action.  Use
what language you will, you can never say anything but what you are.
What I am, and what I think, is conveyed to you, in spite of my
efforts to hold it back.  What I am has been secretly conveyed from
me to another, whilst I was vainly making up my mind to tell him it.
He has heard from me what I never spoke.

        As men get on in life, they acquire a love for sincerity, and
somewhat less solicitude to be lulled or amused.  In the progress of
the character, there is an increasing faith in the moral sentiment,
and a decreasing faith in propositions.  Young people admire talents,
and particular excellences.  As we grow older, we value total powers
and effects, as the spirit, or quality of the man.  We have another
sight, and a new standard; an insight which disregards what is done
_for_ the eye, and pierces to the doer; an ear which hears not what
men say, but hears what they do not say.

        There was a wise, devout man who is called, in the Catholic
Church, St. Philip Neri, of whom many anecdotes touching his
discernment and benevolence are told at Naples and Rome.  Among the
nuns in a convent not far from Rome, one had appeared, who laid claim
to certain rare gifts of inspiration and prophecy, and the abbess
advised the Holy Father, at Rome, of the wonderful powers shown by
her novice.  The Pope did not well know what to make of these new
claims, and Philip coming in from a journey, one day, he consulted
him.  Philip undertook to visit the nun, and ascertain her character.
He threw himself on his mule, all travel-soiled as he was, and
hastened through the mud and mire to the distant convent.  He told
the abbess the wishes of his Holiness, and begged her to summon the
nun without delay.  The nun was sent for, and, as soon as she came
into the apartment, Philip stretched out his leg all bespattered with
mud, and desired her to draw off his boots.  The young nun, who had
become the object of much attention and respect, drew back with
anger, and refused the office: Philip ran out of doors, mounted his
mule, and returned instantly to the Pope; "Give yourself no
uneasiness, Holy Father, any longer: here is no miracle, for here is
no humility."

        We need not much mind what people please to say, but what they
must say; what their natures say, though their busy, artful, Yankee
understandings try to hold back, and choke that word, and to
articulate something different.  If we will sit quietly, -- what they
ought to say is said, with their will, or against their will.  We do
not care for you, let us pretend what we will: -- we are always
looking through you to the dim dictator behind you.  Whilst your
habit or whim chatters, we civilly and impatiently wait until that
wise superior shall speak again.  Even children are not deceived by
the false reasons which their parents give in answer to their
questions, whether touching natural facts, or religion, or persons.
When the parent, instead of thinking how it really is, puts them off
with a traditional or a hypocritical answer, the children perceive
that it is traditional or hypocritical.  To a sound constitution the
defect of another is at once manifest: and the marks of it are only
concealed from us by our own dislocation.  An anatomical observer
remarks, that the sympathies of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis, tell
at last on the face, and on all its features.  Not only does our
beauty waste, but it leaves word how it went to waste.  Physiognomy
and phrenology are not new sciences, but declarations of the soul
that it is aware of certain new sources of information.  And now
sciences of broader scope are starting up behind these.  And so for
ourselves, it is really of little importance what blunders in
statement we make, so only we make no wilful departures from the
truth.  How a man's truth comes to mind, long after we have forgotten
all his words!  How it comes to us in silent hours, that truth is our
only armor in all passages of life and death!  Wit is cheap, and
anger is cheap; but if you cannot argue or explain yourself to the
other party, cleave to the truth against me, against thee, and you
gain a station from which you cannot be dislodged.  The other party
will forget the words that you spoke, but the part you took continues
to plead for you.

        Why should I hasten to solve every riddle which life offers me?
I am well assured that the Questioner, who brings me so many
problems, will bring the answers also in due time.  Very rich, very
potent, very cheerful Giver that he is, he shall have it all his own
way, for me.  Why should I give up my thought, because I cannot
answer an objection to it?  Consider only, whether it remains in my
life the same it was.  That only which we have within, can we see
without.  If we meet no gods, it is because we harbor none.  If there
is grandeur in you, you will find grandeur in porters and sweeps.  He
only is rightly immortal, to whom all things are immortal.  I have
read somewhere, that none is accomplished, so long as any are
incomplete; that the happiness of one cannot consist with the misery
of any other.

        The Buddhists say, "No seed will die:" every seed will grow.
Where is the service which can escape its remuneration?  What is
vulgar, and the essence of all vulgarity, but the avarice of reward?
'Tis the difference of artisan and artist, of talent and genius, of
sinner and saint.  The man whose eyes are nailed not on the nature of
his act, but on the wages, whether it be money, or office, or fame,
-- is almost equally low.  He is great, whose eyes are opened to see
that the reward of actions cannot be escaped, because he is
transformed into his action, and taketh its nature, which bears its
own fruit, like every other tree.  A great man cannot be hindered of
the effect of his act, because it is immediate.  The genius of life
is friendly to the noble, and in the dark brings them friends from
far.  Fear God, and where you go, men shall think they walk in
hallowed cathedrals.

        And so I look on those sentiments which make the glory of the
human being, love, humility, faith, as being also the intimacy of
Divinity in the atoms; and, that, as soon as the man is right,
assurances and previsions emanate from the interior of his body and
his mind; as, when flowers reach their ripeness, incense exhales from
them, and, as a beautiful atmosphere is generated from the planet by
the averaged emanations from all its rocks and soils.

        Thus man is made equal to every event.  He can face danger for
the right.  A poor, tender, painful body, he can run into flame or
bullets or pestilence, with duty for his guide.  He feels the
insurance of a just employment.  I am not afraid of accident, as long
as I am in my place.  It is strange that superior persons should not
feel that they have some better resistance against cholera, than
avoiding green peas and salads.  Life is hardly respectable, -- is
it? if it has no generous, guaranteeing task, no duties or
affections, that constitute a necessity of existing.  Every man's
task is his life-preserver.  The conviction that his work is dear to
God and cannot be spared, defends him.  The lightning-rod that
disarms the cloud of its threat is his body in its duty.  A high aim
reacts on the means, on the days, on the organs of the body.  A high
aim is curative, as well as arnica.  "Napoleon," says Goethe,
"visited those sick of the plague, in order to prove that the man who
could vanquish fear, could vanquish the plague also; and he was
right.  'Tis incredible what force the will has in such cases: it
penetrates the body, and puts it in a state of activity, which repels
all hurtful influences; whilst fear invites them."

        It is related of William of Orange, that, whilst he was
besieging a town on the continent, a gentleman sent to him on public
business came to his camp, and, learning that the King was before the
walls, he ventured to go where he was.  He found him directing the
operation of his gunners, and, having explained his errand, and
received his answer, the King said, "Do you not know, sir, that every
moment you spend here is at the risk of your life?" "I run no more
risk," replied the gentleman, "than your Majesty." "Yes," said the
King, "but my duty brings me here, and yours does not." In a few
minutes, a cannon-ball fell on the spot, and the gentleman was
killed.

        Thus can the faithful student reverse all the warnings of his
early instinct, under the guidance of a deeper instinct.  He learns
to welcome misfortune, learns that adversity is the prosperity of the
great.  He learns the greatness of humility.  He shall work in the
dark, work against failure, pain, and ill-will.  If he is insulted,
he can be insulted; all his affair is not to insult.  Hafiz writes,

        At the last day, men shall wear
        On their heads the dust,
        As ensign and as ornament
        Of their lowly trust.
 
        The moral equalizes all; enriches, empowers all.  It is the
coin which buys all, and which all find in their pocket.  Under the
whip of the driver, the slave shall feel his equality with saints and
heroes.  In the greatest destitution and calamity, it surprises man
with a feeling of elasticity which makes nothing of loss.

        I recall some traits of a remarkable person whose life and
discourse betrayed many inspirations of this sentiment.  Benedict was
always great in the present time.  He had hoarded nothing from the
past, neither in his cabinets, neither in his memory.  He had no
designs on the future, neither for what he should do to men, nor for
what men should do for him.  He said, `I am never beaten until I know
that I am beaten.  I meet powerful brutal people to whom I have no
skill to reply.  They think they have defeated me.  It is so
published in society, in the journals; I am defeated in this fashion,
in all men's sight, perhaps on a dozen different lines.  My leger may
show that I am in debt, cannot yet make my ends meet, and vanquish
the enemy so.  My race may not be prospering: we are sick, ugly,
obscure, unpopular.  My children may be worsted.  I seem to fail in
my friends and clients, too.  That is to say, in all the encounters
that have yet chanced, I have not been weaponed for that particular
occasion, and have been historically beaten; and yet, I know, all the
time, that I have never been beaten; have never yet fought, shall
certainly fight, when my hour comes, and shall beat.'  "A man," says
the Vishnu Sarma, "who having well compared his own strength or
weakness with that of others, after all doth not know the difference,
is easily overcome by his enemies."

        `I spent,' he said, `ten months in the country.  Thick-starred
Orion was my only companion.  Wherever a squirrel or a bee can go
with security, I can go.  I ate whatever was set before me; I touched
ivy and dogwood.  When I went abroad, I kept company with every man
on the road, for I knew that my evil and my good did not come from
these, but from the Spirit, whose servant I was.  For I could not
stoop to be a circumstance, as they did, who put their life into
their fortune and their company.  I would not degrade myself by
casting about in my memory for a thought, nor by waiting for one.  If
the thought come, I would give it entertainment.  It should, as it
ought, go into my hands and feet; but if it come not spontaneously,
it comes not rightly at all.  If it can spare me, I am sure I can
spare it.  It shall be the same with my friends.  I will never woo
the loveliest.  I will not ask any friendship or favor.  When I come
to my own, we shall both know it.  Nothing will be to be asked or to
be granted.' Benedict went out to seek his friend, and met him on the
way; but he expressed no surprise at any coincidences.  On the other
hand, if he called at the door of his friend, and he was not at home,
he did not go again; concluding that he had misinterpreted the
intimations.

        He had the whim not to make an apology to the same individual
whom he had wronged.  For this, he said, was a piece of personal
vanity; but he would correct his conduct in that respect in which he
had faulted, to the next person he should meet.  Thus, he said,
universal justice was satisfied.

        Mira came to ask what she should do with the poor Genesee woman
who had hired herself to work for her, at a shilling a day, and, now
sickening, was like to be bedridden on her hands.  Should she keep
her, or should she dismiss her?  But Benedict said, `Why ask?  One
thing will clear itself as the thing to be done, and not another,
when the hour comes.  Is it a question, whether to put her into the
street?  Just as much whether to thrust the little Jenny on your arm
into the street.  The milk and meal you give the beggar, will fatten
Jenny.  Thrust the woman out, and you thrust your babe out of doors,
whether it so seem to you or not.'

        In the Shakers, so called, I find one piece of belief, in the
doctrine which they faithfully hold, that encourages them to open
their doors to every wayfaring man who proposes to come among them;
for, they say, the Spirit will presently manifest to the man himself,
and to the society, what manner of person he is, and whether he
belongs among them.  They do not receive him, they do not reject him.
And not in vain have they worn their clay coat, and drudged in their
fields, and shuffled in their Bruin dance, from year to year, if they
have truly learned thus much wisdom.

        Honor him whose life is perpetual victory; him, who, by
sympathy with the invisible and real, finds support in labor, instead
of praise; who does not shine, and would rather not.  With eyes open,
he makes the choice of virtue, which outrages the virtuous; of
religion, which churches stop their discords to burn and exterminate;
for the highest virtue is always against the law.

        Miracle comes to the miraculous, not to the arithmetician.
Talent and success interest me but moderately.  The great class, they
who affect our imagination, the men who could not make their hands
meet around their objects, the rapt, the lost, the fools of ideas, --
they suggest what they cannot execute.  They speak to the ages, and
are heard from afar.  The Spirit does not love cripples and
malformations.  If there ever was a good man, be certain, there was
another, and will be more.

        And so in relation to that future hour, that spectre clothed
with beauty at our curtain by night, at our table by day, -- the
apprehension, the assurance of a coming change.  The race of mankind
have always offered at least this implied thanks for the gift of
existence, -- namely, the terror of its being taken away; the
insatiable curiosity and appetite for its continuation.  The whole
revelation that is vouchsafed us, is, the gentle trust, which, in our
experience we find, will cover also with flowers the slopes of this
chasm.

        Of immortality, the soul, when well employed, is incurious.  It
is so well, that it is sure it will be well.  It asks no questions of
the Supreme Power.  The son of Antiochus asked his father, when he
would join battle?  "Dost thou fear," replied the King, "that thou
only in all the army wilt not hear the trumpet?" 'Tis a higher thing
to confide, that, if it is best we should live, we shall live, --
'tis higher to have this conviction, than to have the lease of
indefinite centuries and millenniums and aeons.  Higher than the
question of our duration is the question of our deserving.
Immortality will come to such as are fit for it, and he who would be
a great soul in future, must be a great soul now.  It is a doctrine
too great to rest on any legend, that is, on any man's experience but
our own.  It must be proved, if at all, from our own activity and
designs, which imply an interminable future for their play.

        What is called religion effeminates and demoralizes.  Such as
you are, the gods themselves could not help you.  Men are too often
unfit to live, from their obvious inequality to their own
necessities, or, they suffer from politics, or bad neighbors, or from
sickness, and they would gladly know that they were to be dismissed
from the duties of life.  But the wise instinct asks, `How will death
help them?' These are not dismissed when they die.  You shall not
wish for death out of pusillanimity.  The weight of the Universe is
pressed down on the shoulders of each moral agent to hold him to his
task.  The only path of escape known in all the worlds of God is
performance.  You must do your work, before you shall be released.
And as far as it is a question of fact respecting the government of
the Universe, Marcus Antoninus summed the whole in a word, "It is
pleasant to die, if there be gods; and sad to live, if there be
none."

        And so I think that the last lesson of life, the choral song
which rises from all elements and all angels, is, a voluntary
obedience, a necessitated freedom.  Man is made of the same atoms as
the world is, he shares the same impressions, predispositions, and
destiny.  When his mind is illuminated, when his heart is kind, he
throws himself joyfully into the sublime order, and does, with
knowledge, what the stones do by structure.

        The religion which is to guide and fulfil the present and
coming ages, whatever else it be, must be intellectual.  The
scientific mind must have a faith which is science.  "There are two
things," said Mahomet, "which I abhor, the learned in his
infidelities, and the fool in his devotions." Our times are impatient
of both, and specially of the last.  Let us have nothing now which is
not its own evidence.  There is surely enough for the heart and
imagination in the religion itself.  Let us not be pestered with
assertions and half-truths, with emotions and snuffle.

        There will be a new church founded on moral science, at first
cold and naked, a babe in a manger again, the algebra and mathematics
of ethical law, the church of men to come, without shawms, or
psaltery, or sackbut; but it will have heaven and earth for its beams
and rafters; science for symbol and illustration; it will fast enough
gather beauty, music, picture, poetry.  Was never stoicism so stern
and exigent as this shall be.  It shall send man home to his central
solitude, shame these social, supplicating manners, and make him know
that much of the time he must have himself to his friend.  He shall
expect no cooperation, he shall walk with no companion.  The nameless
Thought, the nameless Power, the superpersonal Heart, -- he shall
repose alone on that.  He needs only his own verdict.  No good fame
can help, no bad fame can hurt him.  The Laws are his consolers, the
good Laws themselves are alive, they know if he have kept them, they
animate him with the leading of great duty, and an endless horizon.
Honor and fortune exist to him who always recognizes the neighborhood
of the great, always feels himself in the presence of high causes.

        VII
 
        CONSIDERATIONS BY THE WAY
 
        Hear what British Merlin sung,
        Of keenest eye and truest tongue.
        Say not, the chiefs who first arrive
        Usurp the seats for which all strive;
        The forefathers this land who found
        Failed to plant the vantage-ground;
        Ever from one who comes to-morrow
        Men wait their good and truth to borrow.
        But wilt thou measure all thy road,
        See thou lift the lightest load.
        Who has little, to him who has less, can spare,
        And thou, Cyndyllan's son! beware
        Ponderous gold and stuffs to bear,
        To falter ere thou thy task fulfil, --
        Only the light-armed climb the hill.
        The richest of all lords is Use,
        And ruddy Health the loftiest Muse.
        Live in the sunshine, swim the sea,
        Drink the wild air's salubrity:
        Where the star Canope shines in May,
        Shepherds are thankful, and nations gay.
        The music that can deepest reach,
        And cure all ill, is cordial speech:
 
 
        Mask thy wisdom with delight,
        Toy with the bow, yet hit the white.
        Of all wit's uses, the main one
        Is to live well with who has none.
        Cleave to thine acre; the round year
        Will fetch all fruits and virtues here:
        Fool and foe may harmless roam,
        Loved and lovers bide at home.
        A day for toil, an hour for sport,
        But for a friend is life too short.

 
        _Considerations by the Way_

        Although this garrulity of advising is born with us, I confess
that life is rather a subject of wonder, than of didactics.  So much
fate, so much irresistible dictation from temperament and unknown
inspiration enters into it, that we doubt we can say anything out of
our own experience whereby to help each other.  All the professions
are timid and expectant agencies.  The priest is glad if his prayers
or his sermon meet the condition of any soul; if of two, if of ten,
'tis a signal success.  But he walked to the church without any
assurance that he knew the distemper, or could heal it.  The
physician prescribes hesitatingly out of his few resources, the same
tonic or sedative to this new and peculiar constitution, which he has
applied with various success to a hundred men before.  If the patient
mends, he is glad and surprised.  The lawyer advises the client, and
tells his story to the jury, and leaves it with them, and is as gay
and as much relieved as the client, if it turns out that he has a
verdict.  The judge weighs the arguments, and puts a brave face on
the matter, and, since there must be a decision, decides as he can,
and hopes he has done justice, and given satisfaction to the
community; but is only an advocate after all.  And so is all life a
timid and unskilful spectator.  We do what we must, and call it by
the best names.  We like very well to be praised for our action, but
our conscience says, "Not unto us." 'Tis little we can do for each
other.  We accompany the youth with sympathy, and manifold old
sayings of the wise, to the gate of the arena, but 'tis certain that
not by strength of ours, or of the old sayings, but only on strength
of his own, unknown to us or to any, he must stand or fall.  That by
which a man conquers in any passage, is a profound secret to every
other being in the world, and it is only as he turns his back on us
and on all men, and draws on this most private wisdom, that any good
can come to him.  What we have, therefore, to say of life, is rather
description, or, if you please, celebration, than available rules.

        Yet vigor is contagious, and whatever makes us either think or
feel strongly, adds to our power, and enlarges our field of action.
We have a debt to every great heart, to every fine genius; to those
who have put life and fortune on the cast of an act of justice; to
those who have added new sciences; to those who have refined life by
elegant pursuits.  'Tis the fine souls who serve us, and not what is
called fine society.  Fine society is only a self-protection against
the vulgarities of the street and the tavern.  Fine society, in the
common acceptation, has neither ideas nor aims.  It renders the
service of a perfumery, or a laundry, not of a farm or factory.  'Tis
an exclusion and a precinct.  Sidney Smith said, "A few yards in
London cement or dissolve friendship." It is an unprincipled decorum;
an affair of clean linen and coaches, of gloves, cards, and elegance
in trifles.  There are other measures of self-respect for a man, than
the number of clean shirts he puts on every day.  Society wishes to
be amused.  I do not wish to be amused.  I wish that life should not
be cheap, but sacred.  I wish the days to be as centuries, loaded,
fragrant.  Now we reckon them as bank-days, by some debt which is to
be paid us, or which we are to pay, or some pleasure we are to taste.
Is all we have to do to draw the breath in, and blow it out again?
Porphyry's definition is better; "Life is that which holds matter
together." The babe in arms is a channel through which the energies
we call fate, love, and reason, visibly stream.  See what a cometary
train of auxiliaries man carries with him, of animals, plants,
stones, gases, and imponderable elements.  Let us infer his ends from
this pomp of means.  Mirabeau said, "Why should we feel ourselves to
be men, unless it be to succeed in everything, everywhere.  You must
say of nothing, _That is beneath me_, nor feel that anything can be
out of your power.  Nothing is impossible to the man who can will.
_Is that necessary?  That shall be:_ -- this is the only law of
success." Whoever said it, this is in the right key.  But this is not
the tone and genius of the men in the street.  In the streets, we
grow cynical.  The men we meet are coarse and torpid.  The finest
wits have their sediment.  What quantities of fribbles, paupers,
invalids, epicures, antiquaries, politicians, thieves, and triflers
of both sexes, might be advantageously spared!  Mankind divides
itself into two classes,-- benefactors and malefactors.  The second
class is vast, the first a handful.  A person seldom falls sick, but
the bystanders are animated with a faint hope that he will die: --
quantities of poor lives; of distressing invalids; of cases for a
gun.  Franklin said, "Mankind are very superficial and dastardly:
they begin upon a thing, but, meeting with a difficulty, they fly
from it discouraged: but they have capacities, if they would employ
them." Shall we then judge a country by the majority, or by the
minority?  By the minority, surely.  'Tis pedantry to estimate
nations by the census, or by square miles of land, or other than by
their importance to the mind of the time.

        Leave this hypocritical prating about the masses.  Masses are
rude, lame, unmade, pernicious in their demands and influence, and
need not to be flattered but to be schooled.  I wish not to concede
anything to them, but to tame, drill, divide, and break them up, and
draw individuals out of them.  The worst of charity is, that the
lives you are asked to preserve are not worth preserving.  Masses!
the calamity is the masses.  I do not wish any mass at all, but
honest men only, lovely, sweet, accomplished women only, and no
shovel-handed, narrow-brained, gin-drinking million stockingers or
lazzaroni at all.  If government knew how, I should like to see it
check, not multiply the population.  When it reaches its true law of
action, every man that is born will be hailed as essential.  Away
with this hurrah of masses, and let us have the considerate vote of
single men spoken on their honor and their conscience.  In old Egypt,
it was established law, that the vote of a prophet be reckoned equal
to a hundred hands.  I think it was much under-estimated.  "Clay and
clay differ in dignity," as we discover by our preferences every day.
What a vicious practice is this of our politicians at Washington
pairing off! as if one man who votes wrong, going away, could excuse
you, who mean to vote right, for going away; or, as if your presence
did not tell in more ways than in your vote.  Suppose the three
hundred heroes at Thermopylae had paired off with three hundred
Persians: would it have been all the same to Greece, and to history?
Napoleon was called by his men _Cent Mille_.  Add honesty to him, and
they might have called him Hundred Million.

        Nature makes fifty poor melons for one that is good, and shakes
down a tree full of gnarled, wormy, unripe crabs, before you can find
a dozen dessert apples; and she scatters nations of naked Indians,
and nations of clothed Christians, with two or three good heads among
them.  Nature works very hard, and only hits the white once in a
million throws.  In mankind, she is contented if she yields one
master in a century.  The more difficulty there is in creating good
men, the more they are used when they come.  I once counted in a
little neighborhood, and found that every able-bodied man had, say
from twelve to fifteen persons dependent on him for material aid, --
to whom he is to be for spoon and jug, for backer and sponsor, for
nursery and hospital, and many functions beside: nor does it seem to
make much difference whether he is bachelor or patriarch; if he do
not violently decline the duties that fall to him, this amount of
helpfulness will in one way or another be brought home to him.  This
is the tax which his abilities pay.  The good men are employed for
private centres of use, and for larger influence.  All revelations,
whether of mechanical or intellectual or moral science, are made not
to communities, but to single persons.  All the marked events of our
day, all the cities, all the colonizations, may be traced back to
their origin in a private brain.  All the feats which make our
civility were the thoughts of a few good heads.

        Meantime, this spawning productivity is not noxious or
needless.  You would say, this rabble of nations might be spared.
But no, they are all counted and depended on.  Fate keeps everything
alive so long as the smallest thread of public necessity holds it on
to the tree.  The coxcomb and bully and thief class are allowed as
proletaries, every one of their vices being the excess or acridity of
a virtue.  The mass are animal, in pupilage, and near chimpanzee.
But the units, whereof this mass is composed are neuters, every one
of which may be grown to a queen-bee.  The rule is, we are used as
brute atoms, until we think: then, we use all the rest.  Nature turns
all malfaisance to good.  Nature provided for real needs.  No sane
man at last distrusts himself.  His existence is a perfect answer to
all sentimental cavils.  If he is, he is wanted, and has the precise
properties that are required.  That we are here, is proof we ought to
be here.  We have as good right, and the same sort of right to be
here, as Cape Cod or Sandy Hook have to be there.

        To say then, the majority are wicked, means no malice, no bad
heart in the observer, but, simply, that the majority are unripe, and
have not yet come to themselves, do not yet know their opinion.
_That_, if they knew it, is an oracle for them and for all.  But in
the passing moment, the quadruped interest is very prone to prevail:
and this beast-force, whilst it makes the discipline of the world,
the school of heroes, the glory of martyrs, has provoked, in every
age, the satire of wits, and the tears of good men.  They find the
journals, the clubs, the governments, the churches, to be in the
interest, and the pay of the devil.  And wise men have met this
obstruction in their times, like Socrates, with his famous irony;
like Bacon, with life-long dissimulation; like Erasmus, with his book
"The Praise of Folly;" like Rabelais, with his satire rending the
nations.  "They were the fools who cried against me, you will say,"
wrote the Chevalier de Boufflers to Grimm; "aye, but the fools have
the advantage of numbers, and 'tis that which decides.  'Tis of no
use for us to make war with them; we shall not weaken them; they will
always be the masters.  There will not be a practice or an usage
introduced, of which they are not the authors."

        In front of these sinister facts, the first lesson of history
is the good of evil.  Good is a good doctor, but Bad is sometimes a
better.  'Tis the oppressions of William the Norman, savage
forest-laws, and crushing despotism, that made possible the
inspirations of _Magna Charta_ under John. Edward I. wanted money,
armies, castles, and as much as he could get.  It was necessary to
call the people together by shorter, swifter ways, -- and the House
of Commons arose.  To obtain subsidies, he paid in privileges.  In
the twenty-fourth year of his reign, he decreed, "that no tax should
be levied without consent of Lords and Commons;" -- which is the
basis of the English Constitution.  Plutarch affirms that the cruel
wars which followed the march of Alexander, introduced the civility,
language, and arts of Greece into the savage East; introduced
marriage; built seventy cities; and united hostile nations under one
government.  The barbarians who broke up the Roman empire did not
arrive a day too soon.  Schiller says, the Thirty Years' War made
Germany a nation.  Rough, selfish despots serve men immensely, as
Henry VIII.  in the contest with the Pope; as the infatuations no
less than the wisdom of Cromwell; as the ferocity of the Russian
czars; as the fanaticism of the French regicides of 1789.  The frost
which kills the harvest of a year, saves the harvests of a century,
by destroying the weevil or the locust.  Wars, fires, plagues, break
up immovable routine, clear the ground of rotten races and dens of
distemper, and open a fair field to new men.  There is a tendency in
things to right themselves, and the war or revolution or bankruptcy
that shatters a rotten system, allows things to take a new and
natural order.  The sharpest evils are bent into that periodicity
which makes the errors of planets, and the fevers and distempers of
men, self-limiting.  Nature is upheld by antagonism.  Passions,
resistance, danger, are educators.  We acquire the strength we have
overcome.  Without war, no soldier; without enemies, no hero.  The
sun were insipid, if the universe were not opaque.  And the glory of
character is in affronting the horrors of depravity, to draw thence
new nobilities of power: as Art lives and thrills in new use and
combining of contrasts, and mining into the dark evermore for blacker
pits of night.  What would painter do, or what would poet or saint,
but for crucifixions and hells?  And evermore in the world is this
marvellous balance of beauty and disgust, magnificence and rats.  Not
Antoninus, but a poor washer-woman said, "The more trouble, the more
lion; that's my principle."

        I do not think very respectfully of the designs or the doings
of the people who went to California, in 1849.  It was a rush and a
scramble of needy adventurers, and, in the western country, a general
jail-delivery of all the rowdies of the rivers.  Some of them went
with honest purposes, some with very bad ones, and all of them with
the very commonplace wish to find a short way to wealth.  But Nature
watches over all, and turns this malfaisance to good.  California
gets peopled and subdued, -- civilized in this immoral way, -- and,
on this fiction, a real prosperity is rooted and grown.  'Tis a
decoy-duck; 'tis tubs thrown to amuse the whale: but real ducks, and
whales that yield oil, are caught.  And, out of Sabine rapes, and out
of robbers' forays, real Romes and their heroisms come in fulness of
time.

        In America, the geography is sublime, but the men are not: the
inventions are excellent, but the inventors one is sometimes ashamed
of.  The agencies by which events so grand as the opening of
California, of Texas, of Oregon, and the junction of the two oceans,
are effected, are paltry, -- coarse selfishness, fraud, and
conspiracy: and most of the great results of history are brought
about by discreditable means.

        The benefaction derived in Illinois, and the great West, from
railroads is inestimable, and vastly exceeding any intentional
philanthropy on record.  What is the benefit done by a good King
Alfred, or by a Howard, or Pestalozzi, or Elizabeth Fry, or Florence
Nightingale, or any lover, less or larger, compared with the
involuntary blessing wrought on nations by the selfish capitalists
who built the Illinois, Michigan, and the network of the Mississippi
valley roads, which have evoked not only all the wealth of the soil,
but the energy of millions of men.  'Tis a sentence of ancient
wisdom, "that God hangs the greatest weights on the smallest wires."

        What happens thus to nations, befalls every day in private
houses.  When the friends of a gentleman brought to his notice the
follies of his sons, with many hints of their danger, he replied,
that he knew so much mischief when he was a boy, and had turned out
on the whole so successfully, that he was not alarmed by the
dissipation of boys; 'twas dangerous water, but, he thought, they
would soon touch bottom, and then swim to the top.  This is bold
practice, and there are many failures to a good escape.  Yet one
would say, that a good understanding would suffice as well as moral
sensibility to keep one erect; the gratifications of the passions are
so quickly seen to be damaging, and, -- what men like least, --
seriously lowering them in social rank.  Then all talent sinks with
character.

        _"Croyez moi, l'erreur aussi a son merite,"_ said Voltaire.  We
see those who surmount, by dint of some egotism or infatuation,
obstacles from which the prudent recoil.  The right partisan is a
heady narrow man, who, because he does not see many things, sees some
one thing with heat and exaggeration, and, if he falls among other
narrow men, or on objects which have a brief importance, as some
trade or politics of the hour, he prefers it to the universe, and
seems inspired, and a godsend to those who wish to magnify the
matter, and carry a point.  Better, certainly, if we could secure the
strength and fire which rude, passionate men bring into society,
quite clear of their vices.  But who dares draw out the linchpin from
the wagon-wheel?  'Tis so manifest, that there is no moral deformity,
but is a good passion out of place; that there is no man who is not
indebted to his foibles; that, according to the old oracle, "the
Furies are the bonds of men;" that the poisons are our principal
medicines, which kill the disease, and save the life.  In the high
prophetic phrase, _He causes the wrath of man to praise him_, and
twists and wrenches our evil to our good.  Shakspeare wrote, --

        "'Tis said, best men are moulded of their faults;"

        and great educators and lawgivers, and especially generals, and
leaders of colonies, mainly rely on this stuff, and esteem men of
irregular and passional force the best timber.  A man of sense and
energy, the late head of the Farm School in Boston harbor, said to
me, "I want none of your good boys, -- give me the bad ones." And
this is the reason, I suppose, why, as soon as the children are good,
the mothers are scared, and think they are going to die.  Mirabeau
said, "There are none but men of strong passions capable of going to
greatness; none but such capable of meriting the public gratitude."
Passion, though a bad regulator, is a powerful spring.  Any absorbing
passion has the effect to deliver from the little coils and cares of
every day: 'tis the heat which sets our human atoms spinning,
overcomes the friction of crossing thresholds, and first addresses in
society, and gives us a good start and speed, easy to continue, when
once it is begun.  In short, there is no man who is not at some time
indebted to his vices, as no plant that is not fed from manures.  We
only insist that the man meliorate, and that the plant grow upward,
and convert the base into the better nature.

        The wise workman will not regret the poverty or the solitude
which brought out his working talents.  The youth is charmed with the
fine air and accomplishments of the children of fortune.  But all
great men come out of the middle classes.  'Tis better for the head;
'tis better for the heart.  Marcus Antoninus says, that Fronto told
him, "that the so-called high-born are for the most part heartless;"
whilst nothing is so indicative of deepest culture as a tender
consideration of the ignorant.  Charles James Fox said of England,
"The history of this country proves, that we are not to expect from
men in affluent circumstances the vigilance, energy, and exertion
without which the House of Commons would lose its greatest force and
weight.  Human nature is prone to indulgence, and the most
meritorious public services have always been performed by persons in
a condition of life removed from opulence." And yet what we ask
daily, is to be conventional.  Supply, most kind gods! this defect in
my address, in my form, in my fortunes, which puts me a little out of
the ring: supply it, and let me be like the rest whom I admire, and
on good terms with them.  But the wise gods say, No, we have better
things for thee.  By humiliations, by defeats, by loss of sympathy,
by gulfs of disparity, learn a wider truth and humanity than that of
a fine gentleman.  A Fifth-Avenue landlord, a West-End householder,
is not the highest style of man: and, though good hearts and sound
minds are of no condition, yet he who is to be wise for many, must
not be protected.  He must know the huts where poor men lie, and the
chores which poor men do.  The first-class minds, Aesop, Socrates,
Cervantes, Shakspeare, Franklin, had the poor man's feeling and
mortification.  A rich man was never insulted in his life: but this
man must be stung.  A rich man was never in danger from cold, or
hunger, or war, or ruffians, and you can see he was not, from the
moderation of his ideas.  'Tis a fatal disadvantage to be cockered,
and to eat too much cake.  What tests of manhood could he stand?
Take him out of his protections.  He is a good book-keeper; or he is
a shrewd adviser in the insurance office: perhaps he could pass a
college examination, and take his degrees: perhaps he can give wise
counsel in a court of law.  Now plant him down among farmers,
firemen, Indians, and emigrants.  Set a dog on him: set a highwayman
on him: try him with a course of mobs: send him to Kansas, to Pike's
Peak, to Oregon: and, if he have true faculty, this may be the
element he wants, and he will come out of it with broader wisdom and
manly power.  Aesop, Saadi, Cervantes, Regnard, have been taken by
corsairs, left for dead, sold for slaves, and know the realities of
human life.

        Bad times have a scientific value.  These are occasions a good
learner would not miss.  As we go gladly to Faneuil Hall, to be
played upon by the stormy winds and strong fingers of enraged
patriotism, so is a fanatical persecution, civil war, national
bankruptcy, or revolution, more rich in the central tones than
languid years of prosperity.  What had been, ever since our memory,
solid continent, yawns apart, and discloses its composition and
genesis.  We learn geology the morning after the earthquake, on
ghastly diagrams of cloven mountains, upheaved plains, and the dry
bed of the sea.

        In our life and culture, everything is worked up, and comes in
use, -- passion, war, revolt, bankruptcy, and not less, folly and
blunders, insult, ennui, and bad company.  Nature is a rag-merchant,
who works up every shred and ort and end into new creations; like a
good chemist, whom I found, the other day, in his laboratory,
converting his old shirts into pure white sugar.  Life is a boundless
privilege, and when you pay for your ticket, and get into the car,
you have no guess what good company you shall find there.  You buy
much that is not rendered in the bill.  Men achieve a certain
greatness unawares, when working to another aim.

        If now in this connection of discourse, we should venture on
laying down the first obvious rules of life, I will not here repeat
the first rule of economy, already propounded once and again, that
every man shall maintain himself, -- but I will say, get health.  No
labor, pains, temperance, poverty, nor exercise, that can gain it,
must be grudged.  For sickness is a cannibal which eats up all the
life and youth it can lay hold of, and absorbs its own sons and
daughters.  I figure it as a pale, wailing, distracted phantom,
absolutely selfish, heedless of what is good and great, attentive to
its sensations, losing its soul, and afflicting other souls with
meanness and mopings, and with ministration to its voracity of
trifles.  Dr. Johnson said severely, "Every man is a rascal as soon
as he is sick." Drop the cant, and treat it sanely.  In dealing with
the drunken, we do not affect to be drunk.  We must treat the sick
with the same firmness, giving them, of course, every aid, -- but
withholding ourselves.  I once asked a clergyman in a retired town,
who were his companions? what men of ability he saw? he replied, that
he spent his time with the sick and the dying.  I said, he seemed to
me to need quite other company, and all the more that he had this:
for if people were sick and dying to any purpose, we would leave all
and go to them, but, as far as I had observed, they were as frivolous
as the rest, and sometimes much more frivolous.  Let us engage our
companions not to spare us.  I knew a wise woman who said to her
friends, "When I am old, rule me." And the best part of health is
fine disposition.  It is more essential than talent, even in the
works of talent.  Nothing will supply the want of sunshine to
peaches, and, to make knowledge valuable, you must have the
cheerfulness of wisdom.  Whenever you are sincerely pleased, you are
nourished.  The joy of the spirit indicates its strength.  All
healthy things are sweet-tempered.  Genius works in sport, and
goodness smiles to the last; and, for the reason, that whoever sees
the law which distributes things, does not despond, but is animated
to great desires and endeavors.  He who desponds betrays that he has
not seen it.

        'Tis a Dutch proverb, that "paint costs nothing," such are its
preserving qualities in damp climates.  Well, sunshine costs less,
yet is finer pigment.  And so of cheerfulness, or a good temper, the
more it is spent, the more of it remains.  The latent heat of an
ounce of wood or stone is inexhaustible.  You may rub the same chip
of pine to the point of kindling, a hundred times; and the power of
happiness of any soul is not to be computed or drained.  It is
observed that a depression of spirits develops the germs of a plague
in individuals and nations.

        It is an old commendation of right behavior, "_Aliis laetus, --
sapiens sibi_," which our English proverb translates, "Be merry _and_
wise." I know how easy it is to men of the world to look grave and
sneer at your sanguine youth, and its glittering dreams.  But I find
the gayest castles in the air that were ever piled, far better for
comfort and for use, than the dungeons in the air that are daily dug
and caverned out by grumbling, discontented people.  I know those
miserable fellows, and I hate them, who see a black star always
riding through the light and colored clouds in the sky overhead:
waves of light pass over and hide it for a moment, but the black star
keeps fast in the zenith.  But power dwells with cheerfulness; hope
puts us in a working mood, whilst despair is no muse, and untunes the
active powers.  A man should make life and Nature happier to us, or
he had better never been born.  When the political economist reckons
up the unproductive classes, he should put at the head this class of
pitiers of themselves, cravers of sympathy, bewailing imaginary
disasters.  An old French verse runs, in my translation: --

        Some of your griefs you have cured,
                And the sharpest you still have survived;
        But what torments of pain you endured
                From evils that never arrived!

        There are three wants which never can be satisfied: that of the
rich, who wants something more; that of the sick, who wants something
different; and that of the traveller, who says, `Anywhere but here.'
The Turkish cadi said to Layard, "After the fashion of thy people,
thou hast wandered from one place to another, until thou art happy
and content in none." My countrymen are not less infatuated with the
_rococo_ toy of Italy.  All America seems on the point of embarking
for Europe.  But we shall not always traverse seas and lands with
light purposes, and for pleasure, as we say.  One day we shall cast
out the passion for Europe, by the passion for America.  Culture will
give gravity and domestic rest to those who now travel only as not
knowing how else to spend money.  Already, who provoke pity like that
excellent family party just arriving in their well-appointed
carriage, as far from home and any honest end as ever?  Each nation
has asked successively, `What are they here for?' until at last the
party are shamefaced, and anticipate the question at the gates of
each town.

        Genial manners are good, and power of accommodation to any
circumstance, but the high prize of life, the crowning fortune of a
man is to be born with a bias to some pursuit, which finds him in
employment and happiness, -- whether it be to make baskets, or
broadswords, or canals, or statutes, or songs.  I doubt not this was
the meaning of Socrates, when he pronounced artists the only truly
wise, as being actually, not apparently so.

        In childhood, we fancied ourselves walled in by the horizon, as
by a glass bell, and doubted not, by distant travel, we should reach
the baths of the descending sun and stars.  On experiment, the
horizon flies before us, and leaves us on an endless common,
sheltered by no glass bell.  Yet 'tis strange how tenaciously we
cling to that bell-astronomy, of a protecting domestic horizon.  I
find the same illusion in the search after happiness, which I
observe, every summer, recommenced in this neighborhood, soon after
the pairing of the birds.  The young people do not like the town, do
not like the sea-shore, they will go inland; find a dear cottage deep
in the mountains, secret as their hearts.  They set forth on their
travels in search of a home: they reach Berkshire; they reach
Vermont; they look at the farms; -- good farms, high mountain-sides:
but where is the seclusion?  The farm is near this; 'tis near that;
they have got far from Boston, but 'tis near Albany, or near
Burlington, or near Montreal.  They explore a farm, but the house is
small, old, thin; discontented people lived there, and are gone: --
there's too much sky, too much out-doors; too public.  The youth
aches for solitude.  When he comes to the house, he passes through
the house.  That does not make the deep recess he sought.  `Ah! now,
I perceive,' he says, `it must be deep with persons; friends only can
give depth.' Yes, but there is a great dearth, this year, of friends;
hard to find, and hard to have when found: they are just going away:
they too are in the whirl of the flitting world, and have engagements
and necessities.  They are just starting for Wisconsin; have letters
from Bremen: -- see you again, soon.  Slow, slow to learn the lesson,
that there is but one depth, but one interior, and that is -- his
purpose.  When joy or calamity or genius shall show him it, then
woods, then farms, then city shopmen and cab-drivers, indifferently
with prophet or friend, will mirror back to him its unfathomable
heaven, its populous solitude.

        The uses of travel are occasional, and short; but the best
fruit it finds, when it finds it, is conversation; and this is a main
function of life.  What a difference in the hospitality of minds!
Inestimable is he to whom we can say what we cannot say to ourselves.
Others are involuntarily hurtful to us, and bereave us of the power
of thought, impound and imprison us.  As, when there is sympathy,
there needs but one wise man in a company, and all are wise, -- so, a
blockhead makes a blockhead of his companion.  Wonderful power to
benumb possesses this brother.  When he comes into the office or
public room, the society dissolves; one after another slips out, and
the apartment is at his disposal.  What is incurable but a frivolous
habit?  A fly is as untamable as a hyena.  Yet folly in the sense of
fun, fooling, or dawdling can easily be borne; as Talleyrand said, "I
find nonsense singularly refreshing;" but a virulent, aggressive fool
taints the reason of a household.  I have seen a whole family of
quiet, sensible people unhinged and beside themselves, victims of
such a rogue.  For the steady wrongheadedness of one perverse person
irritates the best: since we must withstand absurdity.  But
resistance only exasperates the acrid fool, who believes that Nature
and gravitation are quite wrong, and he only is right.  Hence all the
dozen inmates are soon perverted, with whatever virtues and
industries they have, into contradictors, accusers, explainers, and
repairers of this one malefactor; like a boat about to be overset, or
a carriage run away with, -- not only the foolish pilot or driver,
but everybody on board is forced to assume strange and ridiculous
attitudes, to balance the vehicle and prevent the upsetting.  For
remedy, whilst the case is yet mild, I recommend phlegm and truth:
let all the truth that is spoken or done be at the zero of
indifferency, or truth itself will be folly.  But, when the case is
seated and malignant, the only safety is in amputation; as seamen
say, you shall cut and run.  How to live with unfit companions? --
for, with such, life is for the most part spent: and experience
teaches little better than our earliest instinct of self-defence,
namely, not to engage, not to mix yourself in any manner with them;
but let their madness spend itself unopposed; -- you are you, and I
am I.

        Conversation is an art in which a man has all mankind for his
competitors, for it is that which all are practising every day while
they live.  Our habit of thought, -- take men as they rise, -- is not
satisfying; in the common experience, I fear, it is poor and squalid.
The success which will content them, is, a bargain, a lucrative
employment, an advantage gained over a competitor, a marriage, a
patrimony, a legacy, and the like.  With these objects, their
conversation deals with surfaces: politics, trade, personal defects,
exaggerated bad news, and the rain.  This is forlorn, and they feel
sore and sensitive.  Now, if one comes who can illuminate this dark
house with thoughts, show them their native riches, what gifts they
have, how indispensable each is, what magical powers over nature and
men; what access to poetry, religion, and the powers which constitute
character; he wakes in them the feeling of worth, his suggestions
require new ways of living, new books, new men, new arts and
sciences, -- then we come out of our egg-shell existence into the
great dome, and see the zenith over and the nadir under us.  Instead
of the tanks and buckets of knowledge to which we are daily confined,
we come down to the shore of the sea, and dip our hands in its
miraculous waves.  'Tis wonderful the effect on the company.  They
are not the men they were.  They have all been to California, and all
have come back millionnaires.  There is no book and no pleasure in
life comparable to it.  Ask what is best in our experience, and we
shall say, a few pieces of plain-dealing with wise people.  Our
conversation once and again has apprised us that we belong to better
circles than we have yet beheld; that a mental power invites us,
whose generalizations are more worth for joy and for effect than
anything that is now called philosophy or literature.  In excited
conversation, we have glimpses of the Universe, hints of power native
to the soul, far-darting lights and shadows of an Andes landscape,
such as we can hardly attain in lone meditation.  Here are oracles
sometimes profusely given, to which the memory goes back in barren
hours.

        Add the consent of will and temperament, and there exists the
covenant of friendship.  Our chief want in life, is, somebody who
shall make us do what we can.  This is the service of a friend.  With
him we are easily great.  There is a sublime attraction in him to
whatever virtue is in us.  How he flings wide the doors of existence!
What questions we ask of him! what an understanding we have! how few
words are needed!  It is the only real society.  An Eastern poet, Ali
Ben Abu Taleb, writes with sad truth, --

        "He who has a thousand friends has not a friend to spare,
        And he who has one enemy shall meet him everywhere."

        But few writers have said anything better to this point than
Hafiz, who indicates this relation as the test of mental health:
"Thou learnest no secret until thou knowest friendship, since to the
unsound no heavenly knowledge enters." Neither is life long enough
for friendship.  That is a serious and majestic affair, like a royal
presence, or a religion, and not a postilion's dinner to be eaten on
the run.  There is a pudency about friendship, as about love, and
though fine souls never lose sight of it, yet they do not name it.
With the first class of men our friendship or good understanding goes
quite behind all accidents of estrangement, of condition, of
reputation.  And yet we do not provide for the greatest good of life.
We take care of our health; we lay up money; we make our roof tight,
and our clothing sufficient; but who provides wisely that he shall
not be wanting in the best property of all, -- friends?  We know that
all our training is to fit us for this, and we do not take the step
towards it.  How long shall we sit and wait for these benefactors?

        It makes no difference, in looking back five years, how you
have been dieted or dressed; whether you have been lodged on the
first floor or the attic; whether you have had gardens and baths,
good cattle and horses, have been carried in a neat equipage, or in a
ridiculous truck: these things are forgotten so quickly, and leave no
effect.  But it counts much whether we have had good companions, in
that time; -- almost as much as what we have been doing.  And see the
overpowering importance of neighborhood in all association.  As it is
marriage, fit or unfit, that makes our home, so it is who lives near
us of equal social degree, -- a few people at convenient distance, no
matter how bad company, -- these, and these only, shall be your
life's companions: and all those who are native, congenial, and by
many an oath of the heart, sacramented to you, are gradually and
totally lost.  You cannot deal systematically with this fine element
of society, and one may take a good deal of pains to bring people
together, and to organize clubs and debating societies, and yet no
result come of it.  But it is certain that there is a great deal of
good in us that does not know itself, and that a habit of union and
competition brings people up and keeps them up to their highest
point; that life would be twice or ten times life, if spent with wise
and fruitful companions.  The obvious inference is, a little useful
deliberation and preconcert, when one goes to buy house and land.

        But we live with people on other platforms; we live with
dependents, not only with the young whom we are to teach all we know,
and clothe with the advantages we have earned, but also with those
who serve us directly, and for money.  Yet the old rules hold good.
Let not the tie be mercenary, though the service is measured by
money.  Make yourself necessary to somebody.  Do not make life hard
to any.  This point is acquiring new importance in American social
life.  Our domestic service is usually a foolish fracas of
unreasonable demand on one side, and shirking on the other.  A man of
wit was asked, in the train, what was his errand in the city?  He
replied, "I have been sent to procure an angel to do cooking." A lady
complained to me, that, of her two maidens, one was absent-minded,
and the other was absent-bodied.  And the evil increases from the
ignorance and hostility of every ship-load of the immigrant
population swarming into houses and farms.  Few people discern that
it rests with the master or the mistress what service comes from the
man or the maid; that this identical hussy was a tutelar spirit in
one house, and a haridan in the other.  All sensible people are
selfish, and nature is tugging at every contract to make the terms of
it fair.  If you are proposing only your own, the other party must
deal a little hardly by you.  If you deal generously, the other,
though selfish and unjust, will make an exception in your favor, and
deal truly with you.  When I asked an iron-master about the slag and
cinder in railroad iron, -- "O," he said, "there's always good iron
to be had: if there's cinder in the iron, 'tis because there was
cinder in the pay."

        But why multiply these topics, and their illustrations, which
are endless?  Life brings to each his task, and, whatever art you
select, algebra, planting, architecture, poems, commerce, politics,
-- all are attainable, even to the miraculous triumphs, on the same
terms, of selecting that for which you are apt; -- begin at the
beginning, proceed in order, step by step.  'Tis as easy to twist
iron anchors, and braid cannons, as to braid straw, to boil granite
as to boil water, if you take all the steps in order.  Wherever there
is failure, there is some giddiness, some superstition about luck,
some step omitted, which Nature never pardons.  The happy conditions
of life may be had on the same terms.  Their attraction for you is
the pledge that they are within your reach.  Our prayers are
prophets.  There must be fidelity, and there must be adherence.  How
respectable the life that clings to its objects!  Youthful
aspirations are fine things, your theories and plans of life are fair
and commendable: -- but will you stick?  Not one, I fear, in that
Common full of people, or, in a thousand, but one: and, when you tax
them with treachery, and remind them of their high resolutions, they
have forgotten that they made a vow.  The individuals are fugitive,
and in the act of becoming something else, and irresponsible.  The
race is great, the ideal fair, but the men whiffling and unsure.  The
hero is he who is immovably centred.  The main difference between
people seems to be, that one man can come under obligations on which
you can rely, -- is obligable; and another is not.  As he has not a
law within him, there's nothing to tie him to.

        'Tis inevitable to name particulars of virtue, and of
condition, and to exaggerate them.  But all rests at last on that
integrity which dwarfs talent, and can spare it.  Sanity consists in
not being subdued by your means.  Fancy prices are paid for position,
and for the culture of talent, but to the grand interests,
superficial success is of no account.  The man, -- it is his
attitude, -- not feats, but forces, -- not on set days and public
occasions, but, at all hours, and in repose alike as in energy, still
formidable, and not to be disposed of.  The populace says, with Horne
Tooke, "If you would be powerful, pretend to be powerful." I prefer
to say, with the old prophet, "Seekest thou great things? seek them
not:" -- or, what was said of a Spanish prince, "The more you took
from him, the greater he looked." _Plus on lui ote, plus il est
grand_.

        The secret of culture is to learn, that a few great points
steadily reappear, alike in the poverty of the obscurest farm, and in
the miscellany of metropolitan life, and that these few are alone to
be regarded, -- the escape from all false ties; courage to be what we
are; and love of what is simple and beautiful; independence, and
cheerful relation, these are the essentials, -- these, and the wish
to serve, -- to add somewhat to the well-being of men.

        VIII
 
        BEAUTY
 
        Was never form and never face
        So sweet to SEYD as only grace
        Which did not slumber like a stone
        But hovered gleaming and was gone.
        Beauty chased he everywhere,
        In flame, in storm, in clouds of air.
        He smote the lake to feed his eye
        With the beryl beam of the broken wave;
        He flung in pebbles well to hear
        The moment's music which they gave.
        Oft pealed for him a lofty tone
        From nodding pole and belting zone.
        He heard a voice none else could hear
        From centred and from errant sphere.
        The quaking earth did quake in rhyme,
        Seas ebbed and flowed in epic chime.
        In dens of passion, and pits of wo,
        He saw strong Eros struggling through,
        To sun the dark and solve the curse,
        And beam to the bounds of the universe.
        While thus to love he gave his days
        In loyal worship, scorning praise,
        How spread their lures for him, in vain,
        Thieving Ambition and paltering Gain!
        He thought it happier to be dead,
        To die for Beauty, than live for bread.

 
        _Beauty_

        The spiral tendency of vegetation infects education also.  Our
books approach very slowly the things we most wish to know.  What a
parade we make of our science, and how far off, and at arm's length,
it is from its objects!  Our botany is all names, not powers: poets
and romancers talk of herbs of grace and healing; but what does the
botanist know of the virtues of his weeds?  The geologist lays bare
the strata, and can tell them all on his fingers: but does he know
what effect passes into the man who builds his house in them? what
effect on the race that inhabits a granite shelf? what on the
inhabitants of marl and of alluvium?

        We should go to the ornithologist with a new feeling, if he
could teach us what the social birds say, when they sit in the autumn
council, talking together in the trees.  The want of sympathy makes
his record a dull dictionary.  His result is a dead bird.  The bird
is not in its ounces and inches, but in its relations to Nature; and
the skin or skeleton you show me, is no more a heron, than a heap of
ashes or a bottle of gases into which his body has been reduced, is
Dante or Washington.  The naturalist is led _from_ the road by the
whole distance of his fancied advance.  The boy had juster views when
he gazed at the shells on the beach, or the flowers in the meadow,
unable to call them by their names, than the man in the pride of his
nomenclature.  Astrology interested us, for it tied man to the
system.  Instead of an isolated beggar, the farthest star felt him,
and he felt the star.  However rash and however falsified by
pretenders and traders in it,onsmustfurnish the hint was true and
divine, the soul's avowal of its large relations, and, that climate,
century, remote natures, as well as near, are part of its biography.
Chemistry takes to pieces, but it does not construct.  Alchemy which
sought to transmute one element into another, to prolong life, to arm
with power, -- that was in the right direction.  All our science
lacks a human side.  The tenant is more than the house.  Bugs and
stamens and spores, on which we lavish so many years, are not
finalities, and man, when his powers unfold in order, will take
Nature along with him, and emit light into all her recesses.  The
human heart concerns us more than the poring into microscopes, and is
larger than can be measured by the pompous figures of the astronomer.

        We are just so frivolous and skeptical.  Men hold themselves
cheap and vile: and yet a man is a fagot of thunderbolts.  All the
elements pour through his system: he is the flood of the flood, and
fire of the fire; he feels the antipodes and the pole, as drops of
his blood: they are the extension of his personality.  His duties are
measured by that instrument he is; and a right and perfect man would
be felt to the centre of the Copernican system.  'Tis curious that we
only believe as deep as we live.  We do not think heroes can exert
any more awful power than that surface-play which amuses us.  A deep
man believes in miracles, waits for them, believes in magic, believes
that the orator will decompose his adversary; believes that the evil
eye can wither, that the heart's blessing can heal; that love can
exalt talent; can overcome all odds.  From a great heart secret
magnetisms flow incessantly to draw great events.  But we prize very
humble utilities, a prudent husband, a good son, a voter, a citizen,
and deprecate any romance of character; and perhaps reckon only his
money value, -- his intellect, his affection, as a sort of bill of
exchange, easily convertible into fine chambers, pictures,
musonsmustfurnishic, and wine.

        The motive of science was the extension of man, on all sides,
into Nature, till his hands should touch the stars, his eyes see
through the earth, his ears understand the language of beast and
bird, and the sense of the wind; and, through his sympathy, heaven
and earth should talk with him.  But that is not our science.  These
geologies, chemistries, astronomies, seem to make wise, but they
leave us where they found us.  The invention is of use to the
inventor, of questionable help to any other.  The formulas of science
are like the papers in your pocket-book, of no value to any but the
owner.  Science in England, in America, is jealous of theory, hates
the name of love and moral purpose.  There's a revenge for this
inhumanity.  What manner of man does science make?  The boy is not
attracted.  He says, I do not wish to be such a kind of man as my
professor is.  The collector has dried all the plants in his herbal,
but he has lost weight and humor.  He has got all snakes and lizards
in his phials, but science has done for him also, and has put the man
into a bottle.  Our reliance on the physician is a kind of despair of
ourselves.  The clergy have bronchitis, which does not seem a
certificate of spiritual health.  Macready thought it came of the
_falsetto_ of their voicing.  An Indian prince, Tisso, one day riding
in the forest, saw a herd of elk sporting.  "See how happy," he said,
"these browsing elks are!  Why should not priests, lodged and fed
comfortably in the temples, also amuse themselves?" Returning home,
he imparted this reflection to the king.  The king, on the next day,
conferred the sovereignty on him, saying, "Prince, administer this
empire for seven days: at the termination of that period, I shall put
thee to death." At the end of the seventh day, the king inquired,
"From what cause hast thou become so emaciated?" He answered, "From
the horror of death." The monarch rejoined: "Live, my child, and be
wise.  Thou hast ceased to taonsmustfurnishke recreation, saying to
thyself, in seven days I shall be put to death.  These priests in the
temple incessantly meditate on death; how can they enter into
healthful diversions?" But the men of science or the doctors or the
clergy are not victims of their pursuits, more than others.  The
miller, the lawyer, and the merchant, dedicate themselves to their
own details, and do not come out men of more force.  Have they
divination, grand aims, hospitality of soul, and the equality to any
event, which we demand in man, or only the reactions of the mill, of
the wares, of the chicane?

        No object really interests us but man, and in man only his
superiorities; and, though we are aware of a perfect law in Nature,
it has fascination for us only through its relation to him, or, as it
is rooted in the mind.  At the birth of Winckelmann, more than a
hundred years ago, side by side with this arid, departmental, _post
mortem_ science, rose an enthusiasm in the study of Beauty; and
perhaps some sparks from it may yet light a conflagration in the
other.  Knowledge of men, knowledge of manners, the power of form,
and our sensibility to personal influence, never go out of fashion.
These are facts of a science which we study without book, whose
teachers and subjects are always near us.

        So inveterate is our habit of criticism, that much of our
knowledge in this direction belongs to the chapter of pathology.  The
crowd in the street oftener furnishes degradations than angels or
redeemers: but they all prove the transparency.  Every spirit makes
its house; and we can give a shrewd guess from the house to the
inhabitant.  But not less does Nature furnish us with every sign of
grace and goodness.  The delicious faces of children, the beauty of
school-girls, "the sweet seriousness of sixteen," the lofty air of
well-born, well-bred boys, the passionate histories in the looks and
manners of youth and early manhood, and the varied power in all that
well-known company that escort uonsmustfurnishs through life, -- we
know how these forms thrill, paralyze, provoke, inspire, and enlarge
us.

        Beauty is the form under which the intellect prefers to study
the world.  All privilege is that of beauty; for there are many
beauties; as, of general nature, of the human face and form, of
manners, of brain, or method, moral beauty, or beauty of the soul.

        The ancients believed that a genius or demon took possession at
birth of each mortal, to guide him; that these genii were sometimes
seen as a flame of fire partly immersed in the bodies which they
governed; -- on an evil man, resting on his head; in a good man,
mixed with his substance.  They thought the same genius, at the death
of its ward, entered a new-born child, and they pretended to guess
the pilot, by the sailing of the ship.  We recognize obscurely the
same fact, though we give it our own names.  We say, that every man
is entitled to be valued by his best moment.  We measure our friends
so.  We know, they have intervals of folly, whereof we take no heed,
but wait the reappearings of the genius, which are sure and
beautiful.  On the other side, everybody knows people who appear
beridden, and who, with all degrees of ability, never impress us with
the air of free agency.  They know it too, and peep with their eyes
to see if you detect their sad plight.  We fancy, could we pronounce
the solving word, and disenchant them, the cloud would roll up, the
little rider would be discovered and unseated, and they would regain
their freedom.  The remedy seems never to be far off, since the first
step into thought lifts this mountain of necessity.  Thought is the
pent air-ball which can rive the planet, and the beauty which certain
objects have for him, is the friendly fire which expands the thought,
and acquaints the prisoner that liberty and power await him.

        The question of Beauty takes us out of surfaces, to thinking of
the foundations of things.  Goethe said, "The beautiful is a
manifestation ofonsmustfurnish secret laws of Nature, which, but for
this appearance, had been forever concealed from us." And the working
of this deep instinct makes all the excitement -- much of it
superficial and absurd enough -- about works of art, which leads
armies of vain travellers every year to Italy, Greece, and Egypt.
Every man values every acquisition he makes in the science of beauty,
above his possessions.  The most useful man in the most useful world,
so long as only commodity was served, would remain unsatisfied.  But,
as fast as he sees beauty, life acquires a very high value.

        I am warned by the ill fate of many philosophers not to attempt
a definition of Beauty.  I will rather enumerate a few of its
qualities.  We ascribe beauty to that which is simple; which has no
superfluous parts; which exactly answers its end; which stands
related to all things; which is the mean of many extremes.  It is the
most enduring quality, and the most ascending quality.  We say, love
is blind, and the figure of Cupid is drawn with a bandage round his
eyes.  Blind: -- yes, because he does not see what he does not like;
but the sharpest-sighted hunter in the universe is Love, for finding
what he seeks, and only that; and the mythologists tell us, that
Vulcan was painted lame, and Cupid blind, to call attention to the
fact, that one was all limbs, and the other, all eyes.  In the true
mythology, Love is an immortal child, and Beauty leads him as a
guide: nor can we express a deeper sense than when we say, Beauty is
the pilot of the young soul.

        Beyond their sensuous delight, the forms and colors of Nature
have a new charm for us in our perception, that not one ornament was
added for ornament, but is a sign of some better health, or more
excellent action.  Elegance of form in bird or beast, or in the human
figure, marks some excellence of structure: or beauty is only an
invitation from what belongs to us.  'Tis a law of botany, that in
plants, the same virtues follow the same forms.  It is
onsmustfurnisha rule of largest application, true in a plant, true in
a loaf of bread, that in the construction of any fabric or organism,
any real increase of fitness to its end, is an increase of beauty.

        The lesson taught by the study of Greek and of Gothic art, of
antique and of Pre-Raphaelite painting, was worth all the research,
-- namely, that all beauty must be organic; that outside
embellishment is deformity.  It is the soundness of the bones that
ultimates itself in a peach-bloom complexion: health of constitution
that makes the sparkle and the power of the eye.  'Tis the adjustment
of the size and of the joining of the sockets of the skeleton, that
gives grace of outline and the finer grace of movement.  The cat and
the deer cannot move or sit inelegantly.  The dancing-master can
never teach a badly built man to walk well.  The tint of the flower
proceeds from its root, and the lustres of the sea-shell begin with
its existence.  Hence our taste in building rejects paint, and all
shifts, and shows the original grain of the wood: refuses pilasters
and columns that support nothing, and allows the real supporters of
the house honestly to show themselves.  Every necessary or organic
action pleases the beholder.  A man leading a horse to water, a
farmer sowing seed, the labors of haymakers in the field, the
carpenter building a ship, the smith at his forge, or, whatever
useful labor, is becoming to the wise eye.  But if it is done to be
seen, it is mean.  How beautiful are ships on the sea! but ships in
the theatre, -- or ships kept for picturesque effect on Virginia
Water, by George IV., and men hired to stand in fitting costumes at a
penny an hour!  -- What a difference in effect between a battalion of
troops marching to action, and one of our independent companies on a
holiday!  In the midst of a military show, and a festal procession
gay with banners, I saw a boy seize an old tin pan that lay rusting
under a wall, and poising it on the top of a stick, he set
onsmustfurnishit turning, and made it describe the most elegant
imaginable curves, and drew away attention from the decorated
procession by this startling beauty.

        Another text from the mythologists.  The Greeks fabled that
Venus was born of the foam of the sea.  Nothing interests us which is
stark or bounded, but only what streams with life, what is in act or
endeavor to reach somewhat beyond.  The pleasure a palace or a temple
gives the eye, is, that an order and method has been communicated to
stones, so that they speak and geometrize, become tender or sublime
with expression.  Beauty is the moment of transition, as if the form
were just ready to flow into other forms.  Any fixedness, heaping, or
concentration on one feature, -- a long nose, a sharp chin, a
hump-back, -- is the reverse of the flowing, and therefore deformed.
Beautiful as is the symmetry of any form, if the form can move, we
seek a more excellent symmetry.  The interruption of equilibrium
stimulates the eye to desire the restoration of symmetry, and to
watch the steps through which it is attained.  This is the charm of
running water, sea-waves, the flight of birds, and the locomotion of
animals.  This is the theory of dancing, to recover continually in
changes the lost equilibrium, not by abrupt and angular, but by
gradual and curving movements.  I have been told by persons of
experience in matters of taste, that the fashions follow a law of
gradation, and are never arbitrary.  The new mode is always only a
step onward in the same direction as the last mode; and a cultivated
eye is prepared for and predicts the new fashion.  This fact suggests
the reason of all mistakes and offence in our own modes.  It is
necessary in music, when you strike a discord, to let down the ear by
an intermediate note or two to the accord again: and many a good
experiment, born of good sense, and destined to succeed, fails, only
because it is offensively sudden.  I suppose, the Parisian milliner
who dresses the world from her onsmustfurnishimperious boudoir will
know how to reconcile the Bloomer costume to the eye of mankind, and
make it triumphant over Punch himself, by interposing the just
gradations.  I need not say, how wide the same law ranges; and how
much it can be hoped to effect.  All that is a little harshly claimed
by progressive parties, may easily come to be conceded without
question, if this rule be observed.  Thus the circumstances may be
easily imagined, in which woman may speak, vote, argue causes,
legislate, and drive a coach, and all the most naturally in the
world, if only it come by degrees.  To this streaming or flowing
belongs the beauty that all circular movement has; as, the
circulation of waters, the circulation of the blood, the periodical
motion of planets, the annual wave of vegetation, the action and
reaction of Nature: and, if we follow it out, this demand in our
thought for an ever-onward action, is the argument for the
immortality.

 
        One more text from the mythologists is to the same purpose, --
_Beauty rides on a lion_.  Beauty rests on necessities.  The line of
beauty is the result of perfect economy.  The cell of the bee is
built at that angle which gives the most strength with the least wax;
the bone or the quill of the bird gives the most alar strength, with
the least weight.  "It is the purgation of superfluities," said
Michel Angelo.  There is not a particle to spare in natural
structures.  There is a compelling reason in the uses of the plant,
for every novelty of color or form: and our art saves material, by
more skilful arrangement, and reaches beauty by taking every
superfluous ounce that can be spared from a wall, and keeping all its
strength in the poetry of columns.  In rhetoric, this art of omission
is a chief secret of power, and, in general, it is proof of high
culture, to say the greatest matters in the simplest way.

        Veracity first of all, and forever.  _Rien de beau que le
vrai_.  In all design, art lies in making your object
pronsmustfurnishominent, but there is a prior art in choosing objects
that are prominent.  The fine arts have nothing casual, but spring
from the instincts of the nations that created them.

        Beauty is the quality which makes to endure.  In a house that I
know, I have noticed a block of spermaceti lying about closets and
mantel-pieces, for twenty years together, simply because the
tallow-man gave it the form of a rabbit; and, I suppose, it may
continue to be lugged about unchanged for a century.  Let an artist
scrawl a few lines or figures on the back of a letter, and that scrap
of paper is rescued from danger, is put in portfolio, is framed and
glazed, and, in proportion to the beauty of the lines drawn, will be
kept for centuries.  Burns writes a copy of verses, and sends them to
a newspaper, and the human race take charge of them that they shall
not perish.

        As the flute is heard farther than the cart, see how surely a
beautiful form strikes the fancy of men, and is copied and reproduced
without end.  How many copies are there of the Belvedere Apollo, the
Venus, the Psyche, the Warwick Vase, the Parthenon, and the Temple of
Vesta?  These are objects of tenderness to all.  In our cities, an
ugly building is soon removed, and is never repeated, but any
beautiful building is copied and improved upon, so that all masons
and carpenters work to repeat and preserve the agreeable forms,
whilst the ugly ones die out.

        The felicities of design in art, or in works of Nature, are
shadows or forerunners of that beauty which reaches its perfection in
the human form.  All men are its lovers.  Wherever it goes, it
creates joy and hilarity, and everything is permitted to it.  It
reaches its height in woman.  "To Eve," say the Mahometans, "God gave
two thirds of all beauty." A beautiful woman is a practical poet,
taming her savage mate, planting tenderness, hope, and eloquence, in
all whom she approaches.  Some favors of condition must go with it,
since a certain serenity is essential, onsmustfurnishbut we love its
reproofs and superiorities.  Nature wishes that woman should attract
man, yet she often cunningly moulds into her face a little sarcasm,
which seems to say, `Yes, I am willing to attract, but to attract a
little better kind of a man than any I yet behold.' French _memoires_
of the fifteenth century celebrate the name of Pauline de Viguiere, a
virtuous and accomplished maiden, who so fired the enthusiasm of her
contemporaries, by her enchanting form, that the citizens of her
native city of Toulouse obtained the aid of the civil authorities to
compel her to appear publicly on the balcony at least twice a week,
and, as often as she showed herself, the crowd was dangerous to life.
Not less, in England, in the last century, was the fame of the
Gunnings, of whom, Elizabeth married the Duke of Hamilton; and Maria,
the Earl of Coventry.  Walpole says, "the concourse was so great,
when the Duchess of Hamilton was presented at court, on Friday, that
even the noble crowd in the drawing-room clambered on chairs and
tables to look at her.  There are mobs at their doors to see them get
into their chairs, and people go early to get places at the theatres,
when it is known they will be there." "Such crowds," he adds,
elsewhere, "flock to see the Duchess of Hamilton, that seven hundred
people sat up all night, in and about an inn, in Yorkshire, to see
her get into her post-chaise next morning."

        But why need we console ourselves with the fames of Helen of
Argos, or Corinna, or Pauline of Toulouse, or the Duchess of
Hamilton?  We all know this magic very well, or can divine it.  It
does not hurt weak eyes to look into beautiful eyes never so long.
Women stand related to beautiful Nature around us, and the enamored
youth mixes their form with moon and stars, with woods and waters,
and the pomp of summer.  They heal us of awkwardness by their words
and looks.  We observe their intellectual influence on the most
serious student.  They refine and consmustfurnishlear his mind; teach
him to put a pleasing method into what is dry and difficult.  We talk
to them, and wish to be listened to; we fear to fatigue them, and
acquire a facility of expression which passes from conversation into
habit of style.

        That Beauty is the normal state, is shown by the perpetual
effort of Nature to attain it.  Mirabeau had an ugly face on a
handsome ground; and we see faces every day which have a good type,
but have been marred in the casting: a proof that we are all entitled
to beauty, should have been beautiful, if our ancestors had kept the
laws, -- as every lily and every rose is well.  But our bodies do not
fit us, but caricature and satirize us.  Thus, short legs, which
constrain us to short, mincing steps, are a kind of personal insult
and contumely to the owner; and long stilts, again, put him at
perpetual disadvantage, and force him to stoop to the general level
of mankind.  Martial ridicules a gentleman of his day whose
countenance resembled the face of a swimmer seen under water.  Saadi
describes a schoolmaster "so ugly and crabbed, that a sight of him
would derange the ecstasies of the orthodox." Faces are rarely true
to any ideal type, but are a record in sculpture of a thousand
anecdotes of whim and folly.  Portrait painters say that most faces
and forms are irregular and unsymmetrical; have one eye blue, and one
gray; the nose not straight; and one shoulder higher than another;
the hair unequally distributed, etc.  The man is physically as well
as metaphysically a thing of shreds and patches, borrowed unequally
from good and bad ancestors, and a misfit from the start.

        A beautiful person, among the Greeks, was thought to betray by
this sign some secret favor of the immortal gods: and we can pardon
pride, when a woman possesses such a figure, that wherever she
stands, or moves, or leaves a shadow on the wall, or sits for a
portrait to the artist, she confers a favor on the world.  And yet --
it is not beauty that inspires the deepesonsmustfurnisht passion.
Beauty without grace is the hook without the bait.  Beauty, without
expression, tires.  Abbe Menage said of the President Le Bailleul,
"that he was fit for nothing but to sit for his portrait."  A Greek
epigram intimates that the force of love is not shown by the courting
of beauty, but when the like desire is inflamed for one who is
ill-favored.  And petulant old gentlemen, who have chanced to suffer
some intolerable weariness from pretty people, or who have seen cut
flowers to some profusion, or who see, after a world of pains have
been successfully taken for the costume, how the least mistake in
sentiment takes all the beauty out of your clothes, -- affirm, that
the secret of ugliness consists not in irregularity, but in being
uninteresting.

        We love any forms, however ugly, from which great qualities
shine.  If command, eloquence, art, or invention, exist in the most
deformed person, all the accidents that usually displease, please,
and raise esteem and wonder higher.  The great orator was an
emaciated, insignificant person, but he was all brain.  Cardinal De
Retz says of De Bouillon, "With the physiognomy of an ox, he had the
perspicacity of an eagle." It was said of Hooke, the friend of
Newton, "he is the most, and promises the least, of any man in
England." "Since I am so ugly," said Du Guesclin, "it behooves that I
be bold." Sir Philip Sidney, the darling of mankind, Ben Jonson tells
us, "was no pleasant man in countenance, his face being spoiled with
pimples, and of high blood, and long." Those who have ruled human
destinies, like planets, for thousands of years, were not handsome
men.  If a man can raise a small city to be a great kingdom, can make
bread cheap, can irrigate deserts, can join oceans by canals, can
subdue steam, can organize victory, can lead the opinions of mankind,
can enlarge knowledge, 'tis no matter whether his nose is parallel to
his spine, as it ought to be, or whether he has a nose at all;
whether honsmustfurnishis legs are straight, or whether his legs are
amputated; his deformities will come to be reckoned ornamental, and
advantageous on the whole.  This is the triumph of expression,
degrading beauty, charming us with a power so fine and friendly and
intoxicating, that it makes admired persons insipid, and the thought
of passing our lives with them insupportable.  There are faces so
fluid with expression, so flushed and rippled by the play of thought,
that we can hardly find what the mere features really are.  When the
delicious beauty of lineaments loses its power, it is because a more
delicious beauty has appeared; that an interior and durable form has
been disclosed.  Still, Beauty rides on her lion, as before.  Still,
"it was for beauty that the world was made." The lives of the Italian
artists, who established a despotism of genius amidst the dukes and
kings and mobs of their stormy epoch, prove how loyal men in all
times are to a finer brain, a finer method, than their own.  If a man
can cut such a head on his stone gate-post as shall draw and keep a
crowd about it all day, by its beauty, good nature, and inscrutable
meaning; -- if a man can build a plain cottage with such symmetry, as
to make all the fine palaces look cheap and vulgar; can take such
advantage of Nature, that all her powers serve him; making use of
geometry, instead of expense; tapping a mountain for his water-jet;
causing the sun and moon to seem only the decorations of his estate;
this is still the legitimate dominion of beauty.

        The radiance of the human form, though sometimes astonishing,
is only a burst of beauty for a few years or a few months, at the
perfection of youth, and in most, rapidly declines.  But we remain
lovers of it, only transferring our interest to interior excellence.
And it is not only admirable in singular and salient talents, but
also in the world of manners.

        But the sovereign attribute remains to be noted.  Things are
pretty, graceful, rich, elegant, handsoonsmustfurnishme, but, until
they speak to the imagination, not yet beautiful.  This is the reason
why beauty is still escaping out of all analysis.  It is not yet
possessed, it cannot be handled.  Proclus says, "it swims on the
light of forms." It is properly not in the form, but in the mind.  It
instantly deserts possession, and flies to an object in the horizon.
If I could put my hand on the north star, would it be as beautiful?
The sea is lovely, but when we bathe in it, the beauty forsakes all
the near water.  For the imagination and senses cannot be gratified
at the same time.  Wordsworth rightly speaks of "a light that never
was on sea or land," meaning, that it was supplied by the observer,
and the Welsh bard warns his countrywomen, that

        -- "half of their charms with Cadwallon shall die."

        The new virtue which constitutes a thing beautiful, is a
certain cosmical quality, or, a power to suggest relation to the
whole world, and so lift the object out of a pitiful individuality.
Every natural feature, -- sea, sky, rainbow, flowers, musical tone,
-- has in it somewhat which is not private, but universal, speaks of
that central benefit which is the soul of Nature, and thereby is
beautiful.  And, in chosen men and women, I find somewhat in form,
speech, and manners, which is not of their person and family, but of
a humane, catholic, and spiritual character, and we love them as the
sky.  They have a largeness of suggestion, and their face and manners
carry a certain grandeur, like time and justice.

        The feat of the imagination is in showing the convertibility of
every thing into every other thing.  Facts which had never before
left their stark common sense, suddenly figure as Eleusinian
mysteries.  My boots and chair and candlestick are fairies in
disguise, meteors and constellations.  All the facts in Nature are
nouns of the intellect, and make the grammar of the eternal language.
Every word has a double, treble, or centupleonsmustfurnish use and
meaning.  What! has my stove and pepper-pot a false bottom!  I cry
you mercy, good shoe-box!  I did not know you were a jewel-case.
Chaff and dust begin to sparkle, and are clothed about with
immortality.  And there is a joy in perceiving the representative or
symbolic character of a fact, which no bare fact or event can ever
give.  There are no days in life so memorable as those which vibrated
to some stroke of the imagination.

        The poets are quite right in decking their mistresses with the
spoils of the landscape, flower-gardens, gems, rainbows, flushes of
morning, and stars of night, since all beauty points at identity, and
whatsoever thing does not express to me the sea and sky, day and
night, is somewhat forbidden and wrong.  Into every beautiful object,
there enters somewhat immeasurable and divine, and just as much into
form bounded by outlines, like mountains on the horizon, as into
tones of music, or depths of space.  Polarized light showed the
secret architecture of bodies; and when the _second-sight_ of the
mind is opened, now one color or form or gesture, and now another,
has a pungency, as if a more interior ray had been emitted,
disclosing its deep holdings in the frame of things.

        The laws of this translation we do not know, or why one feature
or gesture enchants, why one word or syllable intoxicates, but the
fact is familiar that the fine touch of the eye, or a grace of
manners, or a phrase of poetry, plants wings at our shoulders; as if
the Divinity, in his approaches, lifts away mountains of obstruction,
and deigns to draw a truer line, which the mind knows and owns.  This
is that haughty force of beauty, "_vis superba formae_," which the
poets praise, -- under calm and precise outline, the immeasurable and
divine: Beauty hiding all wisdom and power in its calm sky.

        All high beauty has a moral element in it, and I find the
antique sculpture as ethical as Marcus Antoninus: and the beauty ever
in proportion tonsmustfurnisho the depth of thought.  Gross and
obscure natures, however decorated, seem impure shambles; but
character gives splendor to youth, and awe to wrinkled skin and gray
hairs.  An adorer of truth we cannot choose but obey, and the woman
who has shared with us the moral sentiment, -- her locks must appear
to us sublime.  Thus there is a climbing scale of culture, from the
first agreeable sensation which a sparkling gem or a scarlet stain
affords the eye, up through fair outlines and details of the
landscape, features of the human face and form, signs and tokens of
thought and character in manners, up to the ineffable mysteries of
the intellect.  Wherever we begin, thither our steps tend: an ascent
from the joy of a horse in his trappings, up to the perception of
Newton, that the globe on which we ride is only a larger apple
falling from a larger tree; up to the perception of Plato, that globe
and universe are rude and early expressions of an all-dissolving
Unity, -- the first stair on the scale to the temple of the Mind.

 
 
        IX
 
        ILLUSIONS
 
 
        Flow, flow the waves hated,
        Accursed, adored,
        The waves of mutation:
        No anchorage is.
        Sleep is not, death is not;
        Who seem to die live.
        House you were born in,
        Friends of your spring-time,
        Old man and young maid,
        Day's toil and its guerdon,
        They are all vanishing,
        Fleeing to fables,
        Cannot be moored.
        See the stars through them,
        Through treacherous marbles.
        Know, the stars yonder,
        The stars everlasting,
        Are fugitive also,
        And emulate, vaulted,
        The lambent heat-lightning,
        And fire-fly's flight.
 
        When thou dost return
        On the wave's circulation,
        Beholding the shimmer,
        The wild dissipation,

 
        And, out of endeavor
        To change and to flow,
        The gas become solid,
        And phantoms and nothings
        Return to be things,
        And endless imbroglio
        Is law and the world, --
        Then first shalt thou know,
        That in the wild turmoil,
        Horsed on the Proteus,
        Thou ridest to power,
        And to endurance.
 
 
        _Illusions_
 
        Some years ago, in company with an agreeable parter day in
exploring the Mammoth Cave in Kentucky.  We traversed, through
spacious galleries affording a solid masonry foundation for the town
and county overhead, the six or eight black miles from the mouth of
the cavern to the innermost recess which tourists visit, -- a niche
or grotto made of one seamless stalactite, and called, I believe,
Serena's Bower.  I lost the light of one day.  I saw high domes, and
bottomless pits; heard the voice of unseen waterfalls; paddled three
quarters of a mile in the deep Echo River, whose waters are peopled
with the blind fish; crossed the streams "Lethe" and "Styx;" plied
with music and guns the echoes in these alarming galleries; saw every
form of stalagmite and stalactite in the sculptured and fretted
chambers, -- icicle, orange-flower, acanthus, grapes, and snowball.
We shot Bengal lights into the vaults and groins of the sparry
cathedrals, and examined all the masterpieces which the four combined
engineers, water, limestone, gravitation, and time, could make in the
dark.

        The mysteries and scenery of the cave had the same dignity that
belongs to all natural objects, and which shames the fine things to
which we foppishly compare them.  I remarked, especially, the mimetic
habit, with which Nature, on new instruments, hums her old tunes,
making night to mimic day, and chemistry to ape vegetation.  But I
then took notice, and still chiefly remember, that the best thing
which the cave had to offer was an illusion.  On arriving at what is
called the "Star-Chamber," our lamps were taken from us by the guide,
and extinguished or put aside, and, on looking upwards, I saw or
seemed to see the night heaven thick with stars glimmering more or
less brightly over our heads, and even what seemed a comet flaming
among them.  All the party were touched with astonishment and
pleasure.  Our musical friends sung with much feeling a pretty song,
"The stars are in the quiet sky," &c., and I sat down on the rocky
floor to enjoy the serene picture.  Some crystal specks in the black
ceiling high overhead, reflecting the light of a half-hid lamp,
yielded this magnificent effect.

        I own, I did not like the cave so well for eking out its
sublimities with this theatrical trick.  But I have had many
experiences like it, before and since; and we must be content to be
pleased without too curiously analyzing the occasions.  Our
conversation with Nature is not just what it seems.  The cloud-rack,
the sunrise and sunset glories, rainbows, and northern lights are not
quite so spheral as our childhood thought them; and the part our
organization plays in them is too large.  The senses interfere
everywhere, and mix their own structure with all they report of.
Once, we fancied the earth a plane, and stationary.  In admiring the
sunset, we do not yet deduct the rounding, coordinating, pictorial
powers of the eye.

        The same interference from our organization creates the most of
our pleasure and pain.  Our first mistake is the belief that the
circumstance gives the joy which we give to the circumstance.  Life
is an ecstasy.  Life is sweet as nitrous oxide; and the fisherman
dripping all day over a cold pond, the switchman at the railway
intersection, the farmer in the field, the negro in the rice-swamp,
the fop in the street, the hunter in the woods, the barrister with
the jury, the belle at the ball, all ascribe a certain pleasure to
their employment, which they themselves give it.  Health and appetite
impart the sweetness to sugar, bread, and meat.  We fancy that our
civilization has got on far, but we still come back to our primers.

        We live by our imaginations, by our admirations, by our
sentiments.  The child walks amid heaps of illusions, which he does
not like to have disturbed.  The boy, how sweet to him is his fancy!
how dear the story of barons and battles!  What a hero he is, whilst
he feeds on his heroes!  What a debt is his to imaginative books!  He
has no better friend or influence, than Scott, Shakspeare, Plutarch,
and Homer.  The man lives to other objects, but who dare affirm that
they are more real?  Even the prose of the streets is full of
refractions.  In the life of the dreariest alderman, fancy enters
into all details, and colors them with rosy hue.  He imitates the air
and actions of people whom he admires, and is raised in his own eyes.
He pays a debt quicker to a rich man than to a poor man.  He wishes
the bow and compliment of some leader in the state, or in society;
weighs what he says; perhaps he never comes nearer to him for that,
but dies at last better contented for this amusement of his eyes and
his fancy.

        The world rolls, the din of life is never hushed.  In London,
in Paris, in Boston, in San Francisco, the carnival, the masquerade
is at its height.  Nobody drops his domino.  The unities, the
fictions of the piece it would be an impertinence to break.  The
chapter of fascinations is very long.  Great is paint; nay, God is
the painter; and we rightly accuse the critic who destroys too many
illusions.  Society does not love its un-maskers.  It was wittily, if
somewhat bitterly, said by D'Alembert, _"qu'un etat de vapeur etait
un etat tres facheux, parcequ'il nous faisait voir les choses comme
elles sont."_ I find men victims of illusion in all parts of life.
Children, youths, adults, and old men, all are led by one bawble or
another.  Yoganidra, the goddess of illusion, Proteus, or Momus, or
Gylfi's Mocking, -- for the Power has many names, -- is stronger than
the Titans, stronger than Apollo.  Few have overheard the gods, or
surprised their secret.  Life is a succession of lessons which must
be lived to be understood.  All is riddle, and the key to a riddle is
another riddle.  There are as many pillows of illusion as flakes in a
snow-storm.  We wake from one dream into another dream.  The toys, to
be sure, are various, and are graduated in refinement to the quality
of the dupe.  The intellectual man requires a fine bait; the sots are
easily amused.  But everybody is drugged with his own frenzy, and the
pageant marches at all hours, with music and banner and badge.

        Amid the joyous troop who give in to the charivari, comes now
and then a sad-eyed boy, whose eyes lack the requisite refractions to
clothe the show in due glory, and who is afflicted with a tendency to
trace home the glittering miscellany of fruits and flowers to one
root.  Science is a search after identity, and the scientific whim is
lurking in all corners.  At the State Fair, a friend of mine
complained that all the varieties of fancy pears in our orchards seem
to have been selected by somebody who had a whim for a particular
kind of pear, and only cultivated such as had that perfume; they were
all alike.  And I remember the quarrel of another youth with the
confectioners, that, when he racked his wit to choose the best
comfits in the shops, in all the endless varieties of sweetmeat he
could only find three flavors, or two.  What then?  Pears and cakes
are good for something; and because you, unluckily, have an eye or
nose too keen, why need you spoil the comfort which the rest of us
find in them?  I knew a humorist, who, in a good deal of rattle, had
a grain or two of sense.  He shocked the company by maintaining that
the attributes of God were two, -- power and risibility; and that it
was the duty of every pious man to keep up the comedy.  And I have
known gentlemen of great stake in the community, but whose sympathies
were cold, -- presidents of colleges, and governors, and senators, --
who held themselves bound to sign every temperance pledge, and act
with Bible societies, and missions, and peace-makers, and cry
_Hist-a-boy!_ to every good dog.  We must not carry comity too far,
but we all have kind impulses in this direction.  When the boys come
into my yard for leave to gather horse-chestnuts, I own I enter into
Nature's game, and affect to grant the permission reluctantly,
fearing that any moment they will find out the imposture of that
showy chaff.  But this tenderness is quite unnecessary; the
enchantments are laid on very thick.  Their young life is thatched
with them.  Bare and grim to tears is the lot of the children in the
hovel I saw yesterday; yet not the less they hung it round with
frippery romance, like the children of the happiest fortune, and
talked of "the dear cottage where so many joyful hours had flown."
Well, this thatching of hovels is the custom of the country.  Women,
more than all, are the element and kingdom of illusion.  Being
fascinated, they fascinate.  They see through Claude-Lorraines.  And
how dare any one, if he could, pluck away the _coulisses_, stage
effects, and ceremonies, by which they live?  Too pathetic, too
pitiable, is the region of affection, and its atmosphere always
liable to _mirage_.

        We are not very much to blame for our bad marriages.  We live
amid hallucinations; and this especial trap is laid to trip up our
feet with, and all are tripped up first or last.  But the mighty
Mother who had been so sly with us, as if she felt that she owed us
some indemnity, insinuates into the Pandora-box of marriage some deep
and serious benefits, and some great joys.  We find a delight in the
beauty and happiness of children, that makes the heart too big for
the body.  In the worst-assorted connections there is ever some
mixture of true marriage.  Teague and his jade get some just
relations of mutual respect, kindly observation, and fostering of
each other, learn something, and would carry themselves wiselier, if
they were now to begin.

        'Tis fine for us to point at one or another fine madman, as if
there were any exempts.  The scholar in his library is none.  I, who
have all my life heard any number of orations and debates, read poems
and miscellaneous books, conversed with many geniuses, am still the
victim of any new page; and, if Marmaduke, or Hugh, or Moosehead, or
any other, invent a new style or mythology, I fancy that the world
will be all brave and right, if dressed in these colors, which I had
not thought of.  Then at once I will daub with this new paint; but it
will not stick.  'Tis like the cement which the peddler sells at the
door; he makes broken crockery hold with it, but you can never buy of
him a bit of the cement which will make it hold when he is gone.

        Men who make themselves felt in the world avail themselves of a
certain fate in their constitution, which they know how to use.  But
they never deeply interest us, unless they lift a corner of the
curtain, or betray never so slightly their penetration of what is
behind it.  'Tis the charm of practical men, that outside of their
practicality are a certain poetry and play, as if they led the good
horse Power by the bridle, and preferred to walk, though they can
ride so fiercely.  Bonaparte is intellectual, as well as Caesar; and
the best soldiers, sea-captains, and railway men have a gentleness,
when off duty; a good-natured admission that there are illusions, and
who shall say that he is not their sport?  We stigmatize the
cast-iron fellows, who cannot so detach themselves, as
"dragon-ridden," "thunder-stricken," and fools of fate, with whatever
powers endowed.

        Since our tuition is through emblems and indirections, 'tis
well to know that there is method in it, a fixed scale, and rank
above rank in the phantasms.  We begin low with coarse masks, and
rise to the most subtle and beautiful.  The red men told Columbus,
"they had an herb which took away fatigue;" but he found the illusion
of "arriving from the east at the Indies" more composing to his lofty
spirit than any tobacco.  Is not our faith in the impenetrability of
matter more sedative than narcotics?  You play with jackstraws,
balls, bowls, horse and gun, estates and politics; but there are
finer games before you.  Is not time a pretty toy?  Life will show
you masks that are worth all your carnivals.  Yonder mountain must
migrate into your mind.  The fine star-dust and nebulous blur in
Orion, "the portentous year of Mizar and Alcor," must come down and
be dealt with in your household thought.  What if you shall come to
discern that the play and playground of all this pompous history are
radiations from yourself, and that the sun borrows his beams?  What
terrible questions we are learning to ask!  The former men believed
in magic, by which temples, cities, and men were swallowed up, and
all trace of them gone.  We are coming on the secret of a magic which
sweeps out of men's minds all vestige of theism and beliefs which
they and their fathers held and were framed upon.

        There are deceptions of the senses, deceptions of the passions,
and the structural, beneficent illusions of sentiment and of the
intellect.  There is the illusion of love, which attributes to the
beloved person all which that person shares with his or her family,
sex, age, or condition, nay, with the human mind itself.  'Tis these
which the lover loves, and Anna Matilda gets the credit of them.  As
if one shut up always in a tower, with one window, through which the
face of heaven and earth could be seen, should fancy that all the
marvels he beheld belonged to that window.  There is the illusion of
time, which is very deep; who has disposed of it? or come to the
conviction that what seems the _succession_ of thought is only the
distribution of wholes into causal series?  The intellect sees that
every atom carries the whole of Nature; that the mind opens to
omnipotence; that, in the endless striving and ascents, the
metamorphosis is entire, so that the soul doth not know itself in its
own act, when that act is perfected.  There is illusion that shall
deceive even the elect.  There is illusion that shall deceive even
the performer of the miracle.  Though he make his body, he denies
that he makes it.  Though the world exist from thought, thought is
daunted in presence of the world.  One after the other we accept the
mental laws, still resisting those which follow, which however must
be accepted.  But all our concessions only compel us to new
profusion.  And what avails it that science has come to treat space
and time as simply forms of thought, and the material world as
hypothetical, and withal our pretension of _property_ and even of
self-hood are fading with the rest, if, at last, even our thoughts
are not finalities; but the incessant flowing and ascension reach
these also, and each thought which yesterday was a finality, to-day
is yielding to a larger generalization?

        With such volatile elements to work in, 'tis no wonder if our
estimates are loose and floating.  We must work and affirm, but we
have no guess of the value of what we say or do.  The cloud is now as
big as your hand, and now it covers a county.  That story of Thor,
who was set to drain the drinking-horn in Asgard, and to wrestle with
the old woman, and to run with the runner Lok, and presently found
that he had been drinking up the sea, and wrestling with Time, and
racing with Thought, describes us who are contending, amid these
seeming trifles, with the supreme energies of Nature.  We fancy we
have fallen into bad company and squalid condition, low debts,
shoe-bills, broken glass to pay for, pots to buy, butcher's meat,
sugar, milk, and coal.  `Set me some great task, ye gods! and I will
show my spirit.' `Not so,' says the good Heaven; `plod and plough,
vamp your old coats and hats, weave a shoestring; great affairs and
the best wine by and by.' Well, 'tis all phantasm; and if we weave a
yard of tape in all humility, and as well as we can, long hereafter
we shall see it was no cotton tape at all, but some galaxy which we
braided, and that the threads were Time and Nature.

        We cannot write the order of the variable winds.  How can we
penetrate the law of our shifting moods and susceptibility?  Yet they
differ as all and nothing.  Instead of the firmament of yesterday,
which our eyes require, it is to-day an eggshell which coops us in;
we cannot even see what or where our stars of destiny are.  From day
to day, the capital facts of human life are hidden from our eyes.
Suddenly the mist rolls up, and reveals them, and we think how much
good time is gone, that might have been saved, had any hint of these
things been shown.  A sudden rise in the road shows us the system of
mountains, and all the summits, which have been just as near us all
the year, but quite out of mind.  But these alternations are not
without their order, and we are parties to our various fortune.  If
life seem a succession of dreams, yet poetic justice is done in
dreams also.  The visions of good men are good; it is the
undisciplined will that is whipped with bad thoughts and bad
fortunes.  When we break the laws, we lose our hold on the central
reality.  Like sick men in hospitals, we change only from bed to bed,
from one folly to another; and it cannot signify much what becomes of
such castaways, -- wailing, stupid, comatose creatures, -- lifted
from bed to bed, from the nothing of life to the nothing of death.

        In this kingdom of illusions we grope eagerly for stays and
foundations.  There is none but a strict and faithful dealing at
home, and a severe barring out of all duplicity or illusion there.
Whatever games are played with us, we must play no games with
ourselves, but deal in our privacy with the last honesty and truth.
I look upon the simple and childish virtues of veracity and honesty
as the root of all that is sublime in character.  Speak as you think,
be what you are, pay your debts of all kinds.  I prefer to be owned
as sound and solvent, and my word as good as my bond, and to be what
cannot be skipped, or dissipated, or undermined, to all the _eclat_
in the universe.  This reality is the foundation of friendship,
religion, poetry, and art.  At the top or at the bottom of all
illusions, I set the cheat which still leads us to work and live for
appearances, in spite of our conviction, in all sane hours, that it
is what we really are that avails with friends, with strangers, and
with fate or fortune.

        One would think from the talk of men, that riches and poverty
were a great matter; and our civilization mainly respects it.  But
the Indians say, that they do not think the white man with his brow
of care, always toiling, afraid of heat and cold, and keeping within
doors, has any advantage of them.  The permanent interest of every
man is, never to be in a false position, but to have the weight of
Nature to back him in all that he does.  Riches and poverty are a
thick or thin costume; and our life -- the life of all of us --
identical.  For we transcend the circumstance continually, and taste
the real quality of existence; as in our employments, which only
differ in the manipulations, but express the same laws; or in our
thoughts, which wear no silks, and taste no ice-creams.  We see God
face to face every hour, and know the savor of Nature.

        The early Greek philosophers Heraclitus and Xenophanes measured
their force on this problem of identity.  Diogenes of Apollonia said,
that unless the atoms were made of one stuff, they could never blend
and act with one another.  But the Hindoos, in their sacred writings,
express the liveliest feeling, both of the essential identity, and of
that illusion which they conceive variety to be.  "The notions, `_I
am_,' and `_This is mine_,' which influence mankind, are but
delusions of the mother of the world.  Dispel, O Lord of all
creatures! the conceit of knowledge which proceeds from ignorance."
And the beatitude of man they hold to lie in being freed from
fascination.

        The intellect is stimulated by the statement of truth in a
trope, and the will by clothing the laws of life in illusions.  But
the unities of Truth and of Right are not broken by the disguise.
There need never be any confusion in these.  In a crowded life of
many parts and performers, on a stage of nations, or in the obscurest
hamlet in Maine or California, the same elements offer the same
choices to each new comer, and, according to his election, he fixes
his fortune in absolute Nature.  It would be hard to put more mental
and moral philosophy than the Persians have thrown into a sentence:
--

        "Fooled thou must be, though wisest of the wise:
        Then be the fool of virtue, not of vice."
 
        There is no chance, and no anarchy, in the universe.  All is
system and gradation.  Every god is there sitting in his sphere.  The
young mortal enters the hall of the firmament: there is he alone with
them alone, they pouring on him benedictions and gifts, and beckoning
him up to their thrones.  On the instant, and incessantly, fall
snow-storms of illusions.  He fancies himself in a vast crowd which
sways this way and that, and whose movement and doings he must obey:
he fancies himself poor, orphaned, insignificant.  The mad crowd
drives hither and thither, now furiously commanding this thing to be
done, now that.  What is he that he should resist their will, and
think or act for himself?  Every moment, new changes, and new showers
of deceptions, to baffle and distract him.  And when, by and by, for
an instant, the air clears, and the cloud lifts a little, there are
the gods still sitting around him on their thrones, -- they alone
with him alone.

                                       THE END
.
ic      LITERARY ETHICS
 
        _An Oration delivered before the Literary Societies of
Dartmouth College, July 24, 1838_

        GENTLEMEN,
        The invitation to address you this day, with which you have
honored me, wall so welcome, that I made haste to obey it.  A summons
to celebrate with scholars a literary festival, is so alluring to me,
as to overcome the doubts I might well entertain of my ability to
bring you any thought worthy of your attention.  I have reached the
middle age of man; yet I believe I am not less glad or sanguine at
the meeting of scholars, than when, a boy, I first saw the graduates
of my own College assembled at their anniversary.  Neither years nor
books have yet availed to extirpate a prejudice then rooted in me,
that a scholar is the favorite of Heaven and earth, the excellency of
his country, the happiest of men.  His duties lead him directly into
the holy ground where other men's aspirations only point.  His
successes are occasions of the purest joy to all men.  Eyes is he to
the blind; feet is he to the lame.  His failures, if he is worthy,
are inlets to higher advantages.  And because the scholar, by every
thought he thinks, extends his dominion into the general mind of men,
he is not one, but many.  The few scholars in each country, whose
genius I know, seem to me not individuals, but societies; and, when
events occur of great import, I count over these representatives of
opinion, whom they will affect, as if I were counting nations.  And,
even if his results were incommunicable; if they abode in his own
spirit; the intellect hath somewhat so sacred in its possessions,
that the fact of his existence and pursuits would be a happy omen.

        Meantime I know that a very different estimate of the scholar's
profession prevails in this country, and the importunity, with which
society presses its claim upon young men, tends to pervert the views
of the youth in respect to the culture of the intellect.  Hence the
historical failure, on which Europe and America have so freely
commented.  This country has not fulfilled what seemed the reasonable
expectation of mankind.  Men looked, when all feudal straps and
bandages were snapped asunder, that nature, too long the mother of
dwarfs, should reimburse itself by a brood of Titans, who should
laugh and leap in the continent, and run up the mountains of the West
with the errand of genius and of love.  But the mark of American
merit in painting, in sculpture, in poetry, in fiction, in eloquence,
seems to be a certain grace without grandeur, and itself not new but
derivative; a vase of fair outline, but empty, -- which whoso sees,
may fill with what wit and character is in him, but which does not,
like the charged cloud, overflow with terrible beauty, and emit
lightnings on all beholders.

        I will not lose myself in the desultory questions, what are the
limitations, and what the causes of the fact.  It suffices me to say,
in general, that the diffidence of mankind in the soul has crept over
the American mind; that men here, as elsewhere, are indisposed to
innovation, and prefer any antiquity, any usage, any livery
productive of ease or profit, to the unproductive service of thought.

        Yet, in every sane hour, the service of thought appears
reasonable, the despotism of the senses insane.  The scholar may lose
himself in schools, in words, and become a pedant; but when he
comprehends his duties, he above all men is a realist, and converses
with things.  For, the scholar is the student of the world, and of
what worth the world is, and with what emphasis it accosts the soul
of man, such is the worth, such the call of the scholar.

        The want of the times, and the propriety of this anniversary,
concur to draw attention to the doctrine of Literary Ethics.  What I
have to say on that doctrine distributes itself under the topics of
the resources, the subject, and the discipline of the scholar.

        I. The resources of the scholar are proportioned to his
confidence in the attributes of the Intellect.  The resources of the
scholar are co-extensive with nature and truth, yet can never be his,
unless claimed by him with an equal greatness of mind.  He cannot
know them until he has beheld with awe the infinitude and
impersonality of the intellectual power.  When he has seen, that it
is not his, nor any man's, but that it is the soul which made the
world, and that it is all accessible to him, he will know that he, as
its minister, may rightfully hold all things subordinate and
answerable to it.  A divine pilgrim in nature, all things attend his
steps.  Over him stream the flying constellations; over him streams
Time, as they, scarcely divided into months and years.  He inhales
the year as a vapor: its fragrant midsummer breath, its sparkling
January heaven.  And so pass into his mind, in bright
transfiguration, the grand events of history, to take a new order and
scale from him.  He is the world; and the epochs and heroes of
chronology are pictorial images, in which his thoughts are told.
There is no event but sprung somewhere from the soul of man; and
therefore there is none but the soul of man can interpret.  Every
presentiment of the mind is executed somewhere in a gigantic fact.
What else is Greece, Rome, England, France, St. Helena?  What else
are churches, literatures, and empires?  The new man must feel that
he is new, and has not come into the world mortgaged to the opinions
and usages of Europe, and Asia, and Egypt.  The sense of spiritual
independence is like the lovely varnish of the dew, whereby the old,
hard, peaked earth, and its old self-same productions, are made new
every morning, and shining with the last touch of the artist's hand.
A false humility, a complaisance to reigning schools, or to the
wisdom of antiquity, must not defraud me of supreme possession of
this hour.  If any person have less love of liberty, and less
jealousy to guard his integrity, shall he therefore dictate to you
and me?  Say to such doctors, We are thankful to you, as we are to
history, to the pyramids, and the authors; but now our day is come;
we have been born out of the eternal silence; and now will we live,
-- live for ourselves, -- and not as the pall-bearers of a funeral,
but as the upholders and creators of our age; and neither Greece nor
Rome, nor the three Unities of Aristotle, nor the three Kings of
Cologne, nor the College of the Sorbonne, nor the Edinburgh Review,
is to command any longer.  Now that we are here, we will put our own
interpretation on things, and our own things for interpretation.
Please himself with complaisance who will, -- for me, things must
take my scale, not I theirs.  I will say with the warlike king, "God
gave me this crown, and the whole world shall not take it away."

        The whole value of history, of biography, is to increase my
self-trust, by demonstrating what man can be and do.  This is the
moral of the Plutarchs, the Cudworths, the Tennemanns, who give us
the story of men or of opinions.  Any history of philosophy fortifies
my faith, by showing me, that what high dogmas I had supposed were
the rare and late fruit of a cumulative culture, and only now
possible to some recent Kant or Fichte, -- were the prompt
improvisations of the earliest inquirers; of Parmenides, Heraclitus,
and Xenophanes.  In view of these students, the soul seems to
whisper, `There is a better way than this indolent learning of
another.  Leave me alone; do not teach me out of Leibnitz or
Schelling, and I shall find it all out myself.'

        Still more do we owe to biography the fortification of our
hope.  If you would know the power of character, see how much you
would impoverish the world, if you could take clean out of history
the lives of Milton, Shakspeare, and Plato, -- these three, and cause
them not to be.  See you not, how much less the power of man would
be?  I console myself in the poverty of my thoughts; in the paucity
of great men, in the malignity and dulness of the nations, by falling
back on these sublime recollections, and seeing what the prolific
soul could beget on actual nature; -- seeing that Plato was, and
Shakspeare, and Milton, -- three irrefragable facts.  Then I dare; I
also will essay to be.  The humblest, the most hopeless, in view of
these radiant facts, may now theorize and hope.  In spite of all the
rueful abortions that squeak and gibber in the street, in spite of
slumber and guilt, in spite of the army, the bar-room, and the jail,
_have been_ these glorious manifestations of the mind; and I will
thank my great brothers so truly for the admonition of their being,
as to endeavor also to be just and brave, to aspire and to speak.
Plotinus too, and Spinoza, and the immortal bards of philosophy, --
that which they have written out with patient courage, makes me bold.
No more will I dismiss, with haste, the visions which flash and
sparkle across my sky; but observe them, approach them, domesticate
them, brood on them, and draw out of the past, genuine life for the
present hour.

        To feel the full value of these lives, as occasions of hope and
provocation, you must come to know, that each admirable genius is but
a successful diver in that sea whose floor of pearls is all your own.
The impoverishing philosophy of ages has laid stress on the
distinctions of the individual, and not on the universal attributes
of man.  The youth, intoxicated with his admiration of a hero, fails
to see, that it is only a projection of his own soul, which he
admires.  In solitude, in a remote village, the ardent youth loiters
and mourns.  With inflamed eye, in this sleeping wilderness, he has
read the story of the Emperor Charles the Fifth, until his fancy has
brought home to the surrounding woods, the faint roar of cannonades
in the Milanese, and marches in Germany.  He is curious concerning
that man's day.  What filled it? the crowded orders, the stern
decisions, the foreign despatches, the Castilian etiquette?  The soul
answers -- Behold his day here!  In the sighing of these woods, in
the quiet of these gray fields, in the cool breeze that sings out of
these northern mountains; in the workmen, the boys, the maidens, you
meet, -- in the hopes of the morning, the ennui of noon, and
sauntering of the afternoon; in the disquieting comparisons; in the
regrets at want of vigor; in the great idea, and the puny execution;
-- behold Charles the Fifth's day; another, yet the same; behold
Chatham's, Hampden's, Bayard's, Alfred's, Scipio's, Pericles's day,
-- day of all that are born of women.  The difference of circumstance
is merely costume.  I am tasting the self-same life, -- its
sweetness, its greatness, its pain, which I so admire in other men.
Do not foolishly ask of the inscrutable, obliterated past, what it
cannot tell, -- the details of that nature, of that day, called
Byron, or Burke; -- but ask it of the enveloping Now; the more
quaintly you inspect its evanescent beauties, its wonderful details,
its spiritual causes, its astounding whole, -- so much the more you
master the biography of this hero, and that, and every hero.  Be lord
of a day, through wisdom and justice, and you can put up your history
books.

        An intimation of these broad rights is familiar in the sense of
injury which men feel in the assumption of any man to limit their
possible progress.  We resent all criticism, which denies us any
thing that lies in our line of advance.  Say to the man of letters,
that he cannot paint a Transfiguration, or build a steamboat, or be a
grand-marshal, -- and he will not seem to himself depreciated.  But
deny to him any quality of literary or metaphysical power, and he is
piqued.  Concede to him genius, which is a sort of Stoical _plenum_
annulling the comparative, and he is content; but concede him talents
never so rare, denying him genius, and he is aggrieved.  What does
this mean?  Why simply, that the soul has assurance, by instincts and
presentiments, of _all_ power in the direction of its ray, as well as
of the special skills it has already acquired.

        In order to a knowledge of the resources of the scholar, we
must not rest in the use of slender accomplishments, -- of faculties
to do this and that other feat with words; but we must pay our vows
to the highest power, and pass, if it be possible, by assiduous love
and watching, into the visions of absolute truth.  The growth of the
intellect is strictly analogous in all individuals.  It is larger
reception.  Able men, in general, have good dispositions, and a
respect for justice; because an able man is nothing else than a good,
free, vascular organization, whereinto the universal spirit freely
flows; so that his fund of justice is not only vast, but infinite.
All men, in the abstract, are just and good; what hinders them, in
the particular, is, the momentary predominance of the finite and
individual over the general truth.  The condition of our incarnation
in a private self, seems to be, a perpetual tendency to prefer the
private law, to obey the private impulse, to the exclusion of the law
of universal being.  The hero is great by means of the predominance
of the universal nature; he has only to open his mouth, and it
speaks; he has only to be forced to act, and it acts.  All men catch
the word, or embrace the deed, with the heart, for it is verily
theirs as much as his; but in them this disease of an excess of
organization cheats them of equal issues.  Nothing is more simple
than greatness; indeed, to be simple is to be great.  The vision of
genius comes by renouncing the too officious activity of the
understanding, and giving leave and amplest privilege to the
spontaneous sentiment.  Out of this must all that is alive and genial
in thought go.  Men grind and grind in the mill of a truism, and
nothing comes out but what was put in.  But the moment they desert
the tradition for a spontaneous thought, then poetry, wit, hope,
virtue, learning, anecdote, all flock to their aid.  Observe the
phenomenon of extempore debate.  A man of cultivated mind, but
reserved habits, sitting silent, admires the miracle of free,
impassioned, picturesque speech, in the man addressing an assembly;
-- a state of being and power, how unlike his own!  Presently his own
emotion rises to his lips, and overflows in speech.  He must also
rise and say somewhat.  Once embarked, once having overcome the
novelty of the situation, he finds it just as easy and natural to
speak, -- to speak with thoughts, with pictures, with rhythmical
balance of sentences, -- as it was to sit silent; for, it needs not
to do, but to suffer; he only adjusts himself to the free spirit
which gladly utters itself through him; and motion is as easy as
rest.

        II. I pass now to consider the task offered to the intellect of
this country.  The view I have taken of the resources of the scholar,
presupposes a subject as broad.  We do not seem to have imagined its
riches.  We have not heeded the invitation it holds out.  To be as
good a scholar as Englishmen are; to have as much learning as our
contemporaries; to have written a book that is read; satisfies us.
We assume, that all thought is already long ago adequately set down
in books, -- all imaginations in poems; and what we say, we only
throw in as confirmatory of this supposed complete body of
literature.  A very shallow assumption.  Say rather, all literature
is yet to be written.  Poetry has scarce chanted its first song.  The
perpetual admonition of nature to us, is, `The world is new, untried.
Do not believe the past.  I give you the universe a virgin to-day.'

        By Latin and English poetry, we were born and bred in an
oratorio of praises of nature, -- flowers, birds, mountains, sun, and
moon; -- yet the naturalist of this hour finds that he knows nothing,
by all their poems, of any of these fine things; that he has
conversed with the mere surface and show of them all; and of their
essence, or of their history, knows nothing.  Further inquiry will
discover that nobody, -- that not these chanting poets themselves,
knew any thing sincere of these handsome natures they so commended;
that they contented themselves with the passing chirp of a bird, that
they saw one or two mornings, and listlessly looked at sunsets, and
repeated idly these few glimpses in their song.  But go into the
forest, you shall find all new and undescribed.  The screaming of the
wild geese flying by night; the thin note of the companionable
titmouse, in the winter day; the fall of swarms of flies, in autumn,
from combats high in the air, pattering down on the leaves like rain;
the angry hiss of the wood-birds; the pine throwing out its pollen
for the benefit of the next century; the turpentine exuding from the
tree; -- and, indeed, any vegetation; any animation; any and all, are
alike unattempted.  The man who stands on the seashore, or who
rambles in the woods, seems to be the first man that ever stood on
the shore, or entered a grove, his sensations and his world are so
novel and strange.  Whilst I read the poets, I think that nothing new
can be said about morning and evening.  But when I see the daybreak,
I am not reminded of these Homeric, or Shakspearian, or Miltonic, or
Chaucerian pictures.  No; but I feel perhaps the pain of an alien
world; a world not yet subdued by the thought; or, I am cheered by
the moist, warm, glittering, budding, melodious hour, that takes down
the narrow walls of my soul, and extends its life and pulsation to
the very horizon.  _That_ is morning, to cease for a bright hour to
be a prisoner of this sickly body, and to become as large as nature.

        The noonday darkness of the American forest, the deep, echoing,
aboriginal woods, where the living columns of the oak and fir tower
up from the ruins of the trees of the last millennium; where, from
year to year, the eagle and the crow see no intruder; the pines,
bearded with savage moss, yet touched with grace by the violets at
their feet; the broad, cold lowland, which forms its coat of vapor
with the stillness of subterranean crystallization; and where the
traveller, amid the repulsive plants that are native in the swamp,
thinks with pleasing terror of the distant town; this beauty, --
haggard and desert beauty, which the sun and the moon, the snow and
the rain, repaint and vary, has never been recorded by art, yet is
not indifferent to any passenger.  All men are poets at heart.  They
serve nature for bread, but her loveliness overcomes them sometimes.
What mean these journeys to Niagara; these pilgrims to the White
Hills?  Men believe in the adaptations of utility, always: in the
mountains, they may believe in the adaptations of the eye.
Undoubtedly, the changes of geology have a relation to the prosperous
sprouting of the corn and peas in my kitchen garden; but not less is
there a relation of beauty between my soul and the dim crags of
Agiocochook up there in the clouds.  Every man, when this is told,
hearkens with joy, and yet his own conversation with nature is still
unsung.

        Is it otherwise with civil history?  Is it not the lesson of
our experience that every man, were life long enough, would write
history for himelf?  What else do these volumes of extracts and
manuscript commentaries, that every scholar writes, indicate?  Greek
history is one thing to me; another to you.  Since the birth of
Niebuhr and Wolf, Roman and Greek History have been written anew.
Since Carlyle wrote French History, we see that no history, that we
have, is safe, but a new classifier shall give it new and more
philosophical arrangement.  Thucydides, Livy, have only provided
materials.  The moment a man of genius pronounces the name of the
Pelasgi, of Athens, of the Etrurian, of the Roman people, we see
their state under a new aspect.  As in poetry and history, so in the
other departments.  There are few masters or none.  Religion is yet
to be settled on its fast foundations in the breast of man; and
politics, and philosophy, and letters, and art.  As yet we have
nothing but tendency and indication.

        This starting, this warping of the best literary works from the
adamant of nature, is especially observable in philosophy.  Let it
take what tone of pretension it will, to this complexion must it
come, at last.  Take, for example, the French Eclecticism, which
Cousin esteems so conclusive; there is an optical illusion in it.  It
avows great pretensions.  It looks as if they had all truth, in
taking all the systems, and had nothing to do, but to sift and wash
and strain, and the gold and diamonds would remain in the last
colander.  But, Truth is such a flyaway, such a slyboots, so
untransportable and unbarrelable a commodity, that it is as bad to
catch as light.  Shut the shutters never so quick, to keep all the
light in, it is all in vain; it is gone before you can cry, Hold.
And so it happens with our philosophy.  Translate, collate, distil
all the systems, it steads you nothing; for truth will not be
compelled, in any mechanical manner.  But the first observation you
make, in the sincere act of your nature, though on the veriest
trifle, may open a new view of nature and of man, that, like a
menstruum, shall dissolve all theories in it; shall take up Greece,
Rome, Stoicism, Eclecticism, and what not, as mere data and food for
analysis, and dispose of your world-containing system, as a very
little unit.  A profound thought, anywhere, classifies all things: a
profound thought will lift Olympus.  The book of philosophy is only a
fact, and no more inspiring fact than another, and no less; but a
wise man will never esteem it anything final and transcending.  Go
and talk with a man of genius, and the first word he utters, sets all
your so-called knowledge afloat and at large.  Then Plato, Bacon,
Kant, and the Eclectic Cousin, condescend instantly to be men and
mere facts.

        I by no means aim, in these remarks, to disparage the merit of
these or of any existing compositions; I only say that any particular
portraiture does not in any manner exclude or fore-stall a new
attempt, but, when considered by the soul, warps and shrinks away.
The inundation of the spirit sweeps away before it all our little
architecture of wit and memory, as straws and straw-huts before the
torrent.  Works of the intellect are great only by comparison with
each other; Ivanhoe and Waverley compared with Castle Radcliffe and
the Porter novels; but nothing is great, -- not mighty Homer and
Milton, -- beside the infinite Reason.  It carries them away as a
flood.  They are as a sleep.

        Thus is justice done to each generation and individual, --
wisdom teaching man that he shall not hate, or fear, or mimic his
ancestors; that he shall not bewail himself, as if the world was old,
and thought was spent, and he was born into the dotage of things;
for, by virtue of the Deity, thought renews itself inexhaustibly
every day, and the thing whereon it shines, though it were dust and
sand, is a new subject with countless relations.

        III. Having thus spoken of the resources and the subject of the
scholar, out of the same faith proceeds also the rule of his ambition
and life.  Let him know that the world is his, but he must possess it
by putting himself into harmony with the constitution of things.  He
must be a solitary, laborious, modest, and charitable soul.

        He must embrace solitude as a bride.  He must have his glees
and his glooms alone.  His own estimate must be measure enough, his
own praise reward enough for him.  And why must the student be
solitary and silent?  That he may become acquainted with his
thoughts.  If he pines in a lonely place, hankering for the crowd,
for display, he is not in the lonely place; his heart is in the
market; he does not see; he does not hear; he does not think.  But go
cherish your soul; expel companions; set your habits to a life of
solitude; then, will the faculties rise fair and full within, like
forest trees and field flowers; you will have results, which, when
you meet your fellow-men, you can communicate, and they will gladly
receive.  Do not go into solitude only that you may presently come
into public.  Such solitude denies itself; is public and stale.  The
public can get public experience, but they wish the scholar to
replace to them those private, sincere, divine experiences, of which
they have been defrauded by dwelling in the street.  It is the noble,
manlike, just thought, which is the superiority demanded of you, and
not crowds but solitude confers this elevation.  Not insulation of
place, but independence of spirit is essential, and it is only as the
garden, the cottage, the forest, and the rock, are a sort of
mechanical aids to this, that they are of value.  Think alone, and
all places are friendly and sacred.  The poets who have lived in
cities have been hermits still.  Inspiration makes solitude anywhere.
Pindar, Raphael, Angelo, Dryden, De Stael, dwell in crowds, it may
be, but the instant thought comes, the crowd grows dim to their eye;
their eye fixes on the horizon, -- on vacant space; they forget the
bystanders; they spurn personal relations; they deal with
abstractions, with verities, with ideas.  They are alone with the
mind.

        Of course, I would not have any superstition about solitude.
Let the youth study the uses of solitude and of society.  Let him use
both, not serve either.  The reason why an ingenious soul shuns
society, is to the end of finding society.  It repudiates the false,
out of love of the true.  You can very soon learn all that society
can teach you for one while.  Its foolish routine, an indefinite
multiplication of balls, concerts, rides, theatres, can teach you no
more than a few can.  Then accept the hint of shame, of spiritual
emptiness and waste, which true nature gives you, and retire, and
hide; lock the door; shut the shutters; then welcome falls the
imprisoning rain, -- dear hermitage of nature.  Re-collect the
spirits.  Have solitary prayer and praise.  Digest and correct the
past experience; and blend it with the new and divine life.

        You will pardon me, Gentlemen, if I say, I think that we have
need of a more rigorous scholastic rule; such an asceticism, I mean,
as only the hardihood and devotion of the scholar himself can
enforce.  We live in the sun and on the surface, -- a thin,
plausible, superficial existence, and talk of muse and prophet, of
art and creation.  But out of our shallow and frivolous way of life,
how can greatness ever grow?  Come now, let us go and be dumb.  Let
us sit with our hands on our mouths, a long, austere, Pythagorean
lustrum.  Let us live in corners, and do chores, and suffer, and
weep, and drudge, with eyes and hearts that love the Lord.  Silence,
seclusion, austerity, may pierce deep into the grandeur and secret of
our being, and so diving, bring up out of secular darkness, the
sublimities of the moral constitution.  How mean to go blazing, a
gaudy butterfly, in fashionable or political saloons, the fool of
society, the fool of notoriety, a topic for newspapers, a piece of
the street, and forfeiting the real prerogative of the russet coat,
the privacy, and the true and warm heart of the citizen!

        Fatal to the man of letters, fatal to man, is the lust of
display, the seeming that unmakes our being.  A mistake of the main
end to which they labor, is incident to literary men, who, dealing
with the organ of language, -- the subtlest, strongest, and
longest-lived of man's creations, and only fitly used as the weapon
of thought and of justice, -- learn to enjoy the pride of playing
with this splendid engine, but rob it of its almightiness by failing
to work with it.  Extricating themselves from the tasks of the world,
the world revenges itself by exposing, at every turn, the folly of
these incomplete, pedantic, useless, ghostly creatures.  The scholar
will feel, that the richest romance, -- the noblest fiction that was
ever woven, -- the heart and soul of beauty, -- lies enclosed in
human life.  Itself of surpassing value, it is also the richest
material for his creations.  How shall he know its secrets of
tenderness, of terror, of will, and of fate?  How can he catch and
keep the strain of upper music that peals from it?  Its laws are
concealed under the details of daily action.  All action is an
experiment upon them.  He must bear his share of the common load.  He
must work with men in houses, and not with their names in books.  His
needs, appetites, talents, affections, accomplishments, are keys that
open to him the beautiful museum of human life.  Why should he read
it as an Arabian tale, and not know, in his own beating bosom, its
sweet and smart?  Out of love and hatred, out of earnings, and
borrowings, and lendings, and losses; out of sickness and pain; out
of wooing and worshipping; out of travelling, and voting, and
watching, and caring; out of disgrace and contempt, comes our tuition
in the serene and beautiful laws.  Let him not slur his lesson; let
him learn it by heart.  Let him endeavor exactly, bravely, and
cheerfully, to solve the problem of that life which is set before
_him_.  And this, by punctual action, and not by promises or dreams.
Believing, as in God, in the presence and favor of the grandest
influences, let him deserve that favor, and learn how to receive and
use it, by fidelity also to the lower observances.

        This lesson is taught with emphasis in the life of the great
actor of this age, and affords the explanation of his success.
Bonaparte represents truly a great recent revolution, which we in
this country, please God, shall carry to its farthest consummation.
Not the least instructive passage in modern history, seems to me a
trait of Napoleon, exhibited to the English when he became their
prisoner.  On coming on board the Bellerophon, a file of English
soldiers drawn up on deck, gave him a military salute.  Napoleon
observed, that their manner of handling their arms differed from the
French exercise, and, putting aside the guns of those nearest him,
walked up to a soldier, took his gun, and himself went through the
motion in the French mode.  The English officers and men looked on
with astonishment, and inquired if such familiarity was usual with
the Emperor.

        In this instance, as always, that man, with whatever defects or
vices, represented performance in lieu of pretension.  Feudalism and
Orientalism had long enough thought it majestic to do nothing; the
modern majesty consists in work.  He belonged to a class, fast
growing in the world, who think, that what a man can do is his
greatest ornament, and that he always consults his dignity by doing
it.  He was not a believer in luck; he had a faith, like sight, in
the application of means to ends.  Means to ends, is the motto of all
his behavior.  He believed that the great captains of antiquity
performed their exploits only by correct combinations, and by justly
comparing the relation between means and consequences; efforts and
obstacles.  The vulgar call good fortune that which really is
produced by the calculations of genius.  But Napoleon, thus faithful
to facts, had also this crowning merit; that, whilst he believed in
number and weight, and omitted no part of prudence, he believed also
in the freedom and quite incalculable force of the soul.  A man of
infinite caution, he neglected never the least particular of
preparation, of patient adaptation; yet nevertheless he had a sublime
confidence, as in his all, in the sallies of the courage, and the
faith in his destiny, which, at the right moment, repaired all
losses, and demolished cavalry, infantry, king, and kaisar, as with
irresistible thunderbolts.  As they say the bough of the tree has the
character of the leaf, and the whole tree of the bough, so, it is
curious to remark, Bonaparte's army partook of this double strength
of the captain; for, whilst strictly supplied in all its
appointments, and everything expected from the valor and discipline
of every platoon, in flank and centre, yet always remained his total
trust in the prodigious revolutions of fortune, which his reserved
Imperial Guard were capable of working, if, in all else, the day was
lost.  Here he was sublime.  He no longer calculated the chance of
the cannon-ball.  He was faithful to tactics to the uttermost, -- and
when all tactics had come to an end, then, he dilated, and availed
himself of the mighty saltations of the most formidable soldiers in
nature.

        Let the scholar appreciate this combination of gifts, which,
applied to better purpose, make true wisdom.  He is a revealer of
things.  Let him first learn the things.  Let him not, too eager to
grasp some badge of reward, omit the work to be done.  Let him know,
that, though the success of the market is in the reward, true success
is the doing; that, in the private obedience to his mind; in the
sedulous inquiry, day after day, year after year, to know how the
thing stands; in the use of all means, and most in the reverence of
the humble commerce and humble needs of life, -- to hearken what
_they_ say, and so, by mutual reaction of thought and life, to make
thought solid, and life wise; and in a contempt for the gabble of
to-day's opinions, the secret of the world is to be learned, and the
skill truly to unfold it is acquired.  Or, rather, is it not, that,
by this discipline, the usurpation of the senses is overcome, and the
lower faculties of man are subdued to docility; through which, as an
unobstructed channel, the soul now easily and gladly flows?

        The good scholar will not refuse to bear the yoke in his youth;
to know, if he can, the uttermost secret of toil and endurance; to
make his own hands acquainted with the soil by which he is fed, and
the sweat that goes before comfort and luxury.  Let him pay his
tithe, and serve the world as a true and noble man; never forgetting
to worship the immortal divinities, who whisper to the poet, and make
him the utterer of melodies that pierce the ear of eternal time.  If
he have this twofold goodness, -- the drill and the inspiration, --
then he has health; then he is a whole, and not a fragment; and the
perfection of his endowment will appear in his compositions.  Indeed,
this twofold merit characterizes ever the productions of great
masters.  The man of genius should occupy the whole space between God
or pure mind, and the multitude of uneducated men.  He must draw from
the infinite Reason, on one side; and he must penetrate into the
heart and sense of the crowd, on the other.  From one, he must draw
his strength; to the other, he must owe his aim.  The one yokes him
to the real; the other, to the apparent.  At one pole, is Reason; at
the other, Common Sense.  If he be defective at either extreme of the
scale, his philosophy will seem low and utilitarian; or it will
appear too vague and indefinite for the uses of life.

        The student, as we all along insist, is great only by being
passive to the superincumbent spirit.  Let this faith, then, dictate
all his action.  Snares and bribes abound to mislead him; let him be
true nevertheless.  His success has its perils too.  There is
somewhat inconvenient and injurious in his position.  They whom his
thoughts have entertained or inflamed, seek him before yet they have
learned the hard conditions of thought.  They seek him, that he may
turn his lamp on the dark riddles whose solution they think is
inscribed on the walls of their being.  They find that he is a poor,
ignorant man, in a white-seamed, rusty coat, like themselves, no wise
emitting a continuous stream of light, but now and then a jet of
luminous thought, followed by total darkness; moreover, that he
cannot make of his infrequent illumination a portable taper to carry
whither he would, and explain now this dark riddle, now that.  Sorrow
ensues.  The scholar regrets to damp the hope of ingenuous boys; and
the youth has lost a star out of his new flaming firmament.  Hence
the temptation to the scholar to mystify; to hear the question; to
sit upon it; to make an answer of words, in lack of the oracle of
things.  Not the less let him be cold and true, and wait in patience,
knowing that truth can make even silence eloquent and memorable.
Truth shall be policy enough for him.  Let him open his breast to all
honest inquiry, and be an artist superior to tricks of art.  Show
frankly as a saint would do, your experience, methods, tools, and
means.  Welcome all comers to the freest use of the same.  And out of
this superior frankness and charity, you shall learn higher secrets
of your nature, which gods will bend and aid you to communicate.

        If, with a high trust, he can thus submit himself, he will find
that ample returns are poured into his bosom, out of what seemed
hours of obstruction and loss.  Let him not grieve too much on
account of unfit associates.  When he sees how much thought he owes
to the disagreeable antagonism of various persons who pass and cross
him, he can easily think that in a society of perfect sympathy, no
word, no act, no record, would be.  He will learn, that it is not
much matter what he reads, what he does.  Be a scholar, and he shall
have the scholar's part of every thing.  As, in the counting-room,
the merchant cares little whether the cargo be hides or barilla; the
transaction, a letter of credit or a transfer of stocks; be it what
it may, his commission comes gently out of it; so you shall get your
lesson out of the hour, and the object, whether it be a concentrated
or a wasteful employment, even in reading a dull book, or working off
a stint of mechanical day labor, which your necessities or the
necessities of others impose.

        Gentlemen, I have ventured to offer you these considerations
upon the scholar's place, and hope, because I thought, that,
standing, as many of you now do, on the threshold of this College,
girt and ready to go and assume tasks, public and private, in your
country, you would not be sorry to be admonished of those primary
duties of the intellect, whereof you will seldom hear from the lips
of your new companions.  You will hear every day the maxims of a low
prudence.  You will hear, that the first duty is to get land and
money, place and name.  `What is this Truth you seek? what is this
Beauty?' men will ask, with derision.  If, nevertheless, God have
called any of you to explore truth and beauty, be bold, be firm, be
true.  When you shall say, `As others do, so will I: I renounce, I am
sorry for it, my early visions; I must eat the good of the land, and
let learning and romantic expectations go, until a more convenient
season;' -- then dies the man in you; then once more perish the buds
of art, and poetry, and science, as they have died already in a
thousand thousand men.  The hour of that choice is the crisis of your
history; and see that you hold yourself fast by the intellect.  It is
this domineering temper of the sensual world, that creates the
extreme need of the priests of science; and it is the office and
right of the intellect to make and not take its estimate.  Bend to
the persuasion which is flowing to you from every object in nature,
to be its tongue to the heart of man, and to show the besotted world
how passing fair is wisdom.  Forewarned that the vice of the times
and the country is an excessive pretension, let us seek the shade,
and find wisdom in neglect.  Be content with a little light, so it be
your own.  Explore, and explore.  Be neither chided nor flattered out
of your position of perpetual inquiry.  Neither dogmatize, nor accept
another's dogmatism.  Why should you renounce your right to traverse
the star-lit deserts of truth, for the premature comforts of an acre,
house, and barn?  Truth also has its roof, and bed, and board.  Make
yourself necessary to the world, and mankind will give you bread, and
if not store of it, yet such as shall not takeaway your property in
all men's possessions, in all men's affections, in art, in nature,
and in hope.

        You will not fear, that I am enjoining too stern an asceticism.
Ask not, Of what use is a scholarship that systematically retreats?
or, Who is the better for the philosopher who conceals his
accomplishments, and hides his thoughts from the waiting world?
Hides his thoughts!  Hide the sun and moon.  Thought is all light,
and publishes itself to the universe.  It will speak, though you were
dumb, by its own miraculous organ.  It will flow out of your actions,
your manners, and your face.  It will bring you friendships.  It will
impledge you to truth by the love and expectation of generous minds.
By virtue of the laws of that Nature, which is one and perfect, it
shall yield every sincere good that is in the soul, to the scholar
beloved of earth and heaven.

.
 
        LECTURE ON THE TIMES
 
        _Read at the Masonic Temple, Boston,
        December 2, 1841_

        The times, as we say -- or the present aspects of our social
state, theral Science, Agriculture, Art, Trade, Letters, have their
root in an invisible spiritual reality.  To appear in these aspects,
they must first exist, or have some necessary foundation.  Beside all
the small reasons we assign, there is a great reason for the
existence of every extant fact; a reason which lies grand and
immovable, often unsuspected behind it in silence.  The Times are the
masquerade of the eternities; trivial to the dull, tokens of noble
and majestic agents to the wise; the receptacle in which the Past
leaves its history; the quarry out of which the genius of to-day is
building up the Future.  The Times -- the nations, manners,
institutions, opinions, votes, are to be studied as omens, as sacred
leaves, whereon a weighty sense is inscribed, if we have the wit and
the love to search it out.  Nature itself seems to propound to us
this topic, and to invite us to explore the meaning of the
conspicuous facts of the day.  Everything that is popular, it has
been said, deserves the attention of the philosopher: and this for
the obvious reason, that although it may not be of any worth in
itself, yet it characterizes the people.

        Here is very good matter to be handled, if we are skilful; an
abundance of important practical questions which it behoves us to
understand.  Let us examine the pretensions of the attacking and
defending parties.  Here is this great fact of Conservatism,
entrenched in its immense redoubts, with Himmaleh for its front, and
Atlas for its flank, and Andes for its rear, and the Atlantic and
Pacific seas for its ditches and trenches, which has planted its
crosses, and crescents, and stars and stripes, and various signs and
badges of possession, over every rood of the planet, and says, `I
will hold fast; and to whom I will, will I give; and whom I will,
will I exclude and starve:' so says Conservatism; and all the
children of men attack the colossus in their youth, and all, or all
but a few, bow before it when they are old.  A necessity not yet
commanded, a negative imposed on the will of man by his condition a
deficiency in his force, is the foundation on which it rests.  Let
this side be fairly stated.  Meantime, on the other part, arises
Reform, and offers the sentiment of Love as an overmatch to this
material might.  I wish to consider well this affirmative side, which
has a loftier port and reason than heretofore, which encroaches on
the other every day, puts it out of countenance, out of reason, and
out of temper, and leaves it nothing but silence and possession.

        The fact of aristocracy, with its two weapons of wealth and
manners, is as commanding a feature of the nineteenth century, and
the American republic, as of old Rome, or modern England.  The reason
and influence of wealth, the aspect of philosophy and religion, and
the tendencies which have acquired the name of Transcendentalism in
Old and New England; the aspect of poetry, as the exponent and
interpretation of these things; the fuller development and the freer
play of Character as a social and political agent; -- these and other
related topics will in turn come to be considered.

        But the subject of the Times is not an abstract question.  We
talk of the world, but we mean a few men and women.  If you speak of
the age, you mean your own platoon of people, as Milton and Dante
painted in colossal their platoons, and called them Heaven and Hell.
In our idea of progress, we do not go out of this personal picture.
We do not think the sky will be bluer, or honey sweeter, or our
climate more temperate, but only that our relation to our fellows
will be simpler and happier.  What is the reason to be given for this
extreme attraction which _persons_ have for us, but that they are the
Age? they are the results of the Past; they are the heralds of the
Future.  They indicate, -- these witty, suffering, blushing,
intimidating figures of the only race in which there are individuals
or changes, how far on the Fate has gone, and what it drives at.  As
trees make scenery, and constitute the hospitality of the landscape,
so persons are the world to persons.  A cunning mystery by which the
Great Desart of thoughts and of planets takes this engaging form, to
bring, as it would seem, its meanings nearer to the mind.  Thoughts
walk and speak, and look with eyes at me, and transport me into new
and magnificent scenes.  These are the pungent instructors who thrill
the heart of each of us, and make all other teaching formal and cold.
How I follow them with aching heart, with pining desire!  I count
myself nothing before them.  I would die for them with joy.  They can
do what they will with me.  How they lash us with those tongues!  How
they make the tears start, make us blush and turn pale, and lap us in
Elysium to soothing dreams, and castles in the air!  By tones of
triumph; of dear love; by threats; by pride that freezes; these have
the skill to make the world look bleak and inhospitable, or seem the
nest of tenderness and joy.  I do not wonder at the miracles which
poetry attributes to the music of Orpheus, when I remember what I
have experienced from the varied notes of the human voice.  They are
an incalculable energy which countervails all other forces in nature,
because they are the channel of supernatural powers.  There is no
interest or institution so poor and withered, but if a new strong man
could be born into it, he would immediately redeem and replace it.  A
personal ascendency, -- that is the only fact much worth considering.
I remember, some years ago, somebody shocked a circle of friends of
order here in Boston, who supposed that our people were identified
with their religious denominations, by declaring that an eloquent
man, -- let him be of what sect soever, -- would be ordained at once
in one of our metropolitan churches.  To be sure he would; and not
only in ours, but in any church, mosque, or temple, on the planet;
but he must be eloquent, able to supplant our method and
classification, by the superior beauty of his own.  Every fact we
have was brought here by some person; and there is none that will not
change and pass away before a person, whose nature is broader than
the person which the fact in question represents.  And so I find the
Age walking about in happy and hopeful natures, in strong eyes, and
pleasant thoughts, and think I read it nearer and truer so, than in
the statute-book, or in the investments of capital, which rather
celebrate with mournful music the obsequies of the last age.  In the
brain of a fanatic; in the wild hope of a mountain boy, called by
city boys very ignorant, because they do not know what his hope has
certainly apprised him shall be; in the love-glance of a girl; in the
hair-splitting conscientiousness of some eccentric person, who has
found some new scruple to embarrass himself and his neighbors withal;
is to be found that which shall constitute the times to come, more
than in the now organized and accredited oracles.  For, whatever is
affirmative and now advancing, contains it.  I think that only is
real, which men love and rejoice in; not what they tolerate, but what
they choose; what they embrace and avow, and not the things which
chill, benumb, and terrify them.

        And so why not draw for these times a portrait gallery?  Let us
paint the painters.  Whilst the Daguerreotypist, with camera-obscura
and silver plate, begins now to traverse the land, let us set up our
Camera also, and let the sun paint the people.  Let us paint the
agitator, and the man of the old school, and the member of Congress,
and the college-professor, the formidable editor, the priest, and
reformer, the contemplative girl, and the fair aspirant for fashion
and opportunities, the woman of the world who has tried and knows; --
let us examine how well she knows.  Could we indicate the indicators,
indicate those who most accurately represent every good and evil
tendency of the general mind, in the just order which they take on
this canvass of Time; so that all witnesses should recognise a
spiritual law, as each well known form flitted for a moment across
the wall, we should have a series of sketches which would report to
the next ages the color and quality of ours.

        Certainly, I think, if this were done, there would be much to
admire as well as to condemn; souls of as lofty a port, as any in
Greek or Roman fame, might appear; men of great heart, of strong
hand, and of persuasive speech; subtle thinkers, and men of wide
sympathy, and an apprehension which looks over all history, and
everywhere recognises its own.  To be sure, there will be fragments
and hints of men, more than enough: bloated promises, which end in
nothing or little.  And then truly great men, but with some defect in
their composition, which neutralizes their whole force.  Here is a
Damascus blade, such as you may search through nature in vain to
parallel, laid up on the shelf in some village to rust and ruin.  And
how many seem not quite available for that idea which they represent!
Now and then comes a bolder spirit, I should rather say, a more
surrendered soul, more informed and led by God, which is much in
advance of the rest, quite beyond their sympathy, but predicts what
shall soon be the general fulness; as when we stand by the seashore,
whilst the tide is coming in, a wave comes up the beach far higher
than any foregoing one, and recedes; and for a long while none comes
up to that mark; but after some time the whole sea is there and
beyond it.

        But we are not permitted to stand as spectators of the pageant
which the times exhibit: we are parties also, and have a
responsibility which is not to be declined.  A little while this
interval of wonder and comparison is permitted us, but to the end
that we shall play a manly part.  As the solar system moves forward
in the heavens, certain stars open before us, and certain stars close
up behind us; so is man's life.  The reputations that were great and
inaccessible change and tarnish.  How great were once Lord Bacon's
dimensions! he is now reduced almost to the middle height; and many
another star has turned out to be a planet or an asteroid: only a few
are the fixed stars which have no parallax, or none for us.  The
change and decline of old reputations are the gracious marks of our
own growth.  Slowly, like light of morning, it steals on us, the new
fact, that we, who were pupils or aspirants, are now society: do
compose a portion of that head and heart we are wont to think worthy
of all reverence and heed.  We are the representatives of religion
and intellect, and stand in the light of Ideas, whose rays stream
through us to those younger and more in the dark.  What further
relations we sustain, what new lodges we are entering, is now
unknown.  To-day is a king in disguise.  To-day always looks mean to
the thoughtless, in the face of an uniform experience, that all good
and great and happy actions are made up precisely of these blank
to-days.  Let us not be so deceived.  Let us unmask the king as he
passes.  Let us not inhabit times of wonderful and various promise
without divining their tendency.  Let us not see the foundations of
nations, and of a new and better order of things laid, with roving
eyes, and an attention preoccupied with trifles.

        The two omnipresent parties of History, the party of the Past
and the party of the Future, divide society to-day as of old.  Here
is the innumerable multitude of those who accept the state and the
church from the last generation, and stand on no argument but
possession.  They have reason also, and, as I think, better reason
than is commonly stated.  No Burke, no Metternich has yet done full
justice to the side of conservatism.  But this class, however large,
relying not on the intellect but on instinct, blends itself with the
brute forces of nature, is respectable only as nature is, but the
individuals have no attraction for us.  It is the dissenter, the
theorist, the aspirant, who is quitting this ancient domain to embark
on seas of adventure, who engages our interest.  Omitting then for
the present all notice of the stationary class, we shall find that
the movement party divides itself into two classes, the actors, and
the students.

        The actors constitute that great army of martyrs who, at least
in America, by their conscience and philanthropy, occupy the ground
which Calvinism occupied in the last age, and compose the visible
church of the existing generation.  The present age will be marked by
its harvest of projects for the reform of domestic, civil, literary,
and ecclesiastical institutions.  The leaders of the crusades against
War, Negro slavery, Intemperance, Government based on force, Usages
of trade, Court and Custom-house Oaths, and so on to the agitators on
the system of Education and the laws of Property, are the right
successors of Luther, Knox, Robinson, Fox, Penn, Wesley, and
Whitfield.  They have the same virtues and vices; the same noble
impulse, and the same bigotry.  These movements are on all accounts
important; they not only check the special abuses, but they educate
the conscience and the intellect of the people.  How can such a
question as the Slave trade be agitated for forty years by all the
Christian nations, without throwing great light on ethics into the
general mind?  The fury, with which the slave-trader defends every
inch of his bloody deck, and his howling auction-platform, is a
trumpet to alarm the ear of mankind, to wake the dull, and drive all
neutrals to take sides, and to listen to the argument and the
verdict.  The Temperance-question, which rides the conversation of
ten thousand circles, and is tacitly recalled at every public and at
every private table, drawing with it all the curious ethics of the
Pledge, of the Wine-question, of the equity of the manufacture and
the trade, is a gymnastic training to the casuistry and conscience of
the time.  Antimasonry had a deep right and wrong, which gradually
emerged to sight out of the turbid controversy.  The political
questions touching the Banks; the Tariff; the limits of the executive
power; the right of the constituent to instruct the representative;
the treatment of the Indians; the Boundary wars; the Congress of
nations; are all pregnant with ethical conclusions; and it is well if
government and our social order can extricate themselves from these
alembics, and find themselves still government and social order.  The
student of history will hereafter compute the singular value of our
endless discussion of questions, to the mind of the period.

        Whilst each of these aspirations and attempts of the people for
the Better is magnified by the natural exaggeration of its advocates,
until it excludes the others from sight, and repels discreet persons
by the unfairness of the plea, the movements are in reality all parts
of one movement.  There is a perfect chain, -- see it, or see it not,
-- of reforms emerging from the surrounding darkness, each cherishing
some part of the general idea, and all must be seen, in order to do
justice to any one.  Seen in this their natural connection, they are
sublime.  The conscience of the Age demonstrates itself in this
effort to raise the life of man by putting it in harmony with his
idea of the Beautiful and the Just.  The history of reform is always
identical; it is the comparison of the idea with the fact.  Our modes
of living are not agreeable to our imagination.  We suspect they are
unworthy.  We arraign our daily employments.  They appear to us
unfit, unworthy of the faculties we spend on them.  In conversation
with a wise man, we find ourselves apologizing for our employments;
we speak of them with shame.  Nature, literature, science, childhood,
appear to us beautiful; but not our own daily work, not the ripe
fruit and considered labors of man.  This beauty which the fancy
finds in everything else, certainly accuses that manner of life we
lead.  Why should it be hateful?  Why should it contrast thus with
all natural beauty?  Why should it not be poetic, and invite and
raise us?  Is there a necessity that the works of man should be
sordid?  Perhaps not.  -- Out of this fair Idea in the mind springs
the effort at the Perfect.  It is the interior testimony to a fairer
possibility of life and manners, which agitates society every day
with the offer of some new amendment.  If we would make more strict
inquiry concerning its origin, we find ourselves rapidly approaching
the inner boundaries of thought, that term where speech becomes
silence, and science conscience.  For the origin of all reform is in
that mysterious fountain of the moral sentiment in man, which, amidst
the natural, ever contains the supernatural for men.  That is new and
creative.  That is alive.  That alone can make a man other than he
is.  Here or nowhere resides unbounded energy, unbounded power.

        The new voices in the wilderness crying "Repent," have revived
a hope, which had well nigh perished out of the world, that the
thoughts of the mind may yet, in some distant age, in some happy
hour, be executed by the hands.  That is the hope, of which all other
hopes are parts.  For some ages, these ideas have been consigned to
the poet and musical composer, to the prayers and the sermons of
churches; but the thought, that they can ever have any footing in
real life, seems long since to have been exploded by all judicious
persons.  Milton, in his best tract, describes a relation between
religion and the daily occupations, which is true until this time.

        "A wealthy man, addicted to his pleasure and to his profits,
finds religion to be a traffic so entangled, and of so many piddling
accounts, that of all mysteries he cannot skill to keep a stock going
upon that trade.  What should he do?  Fain he would have the name to
be religious; fain he would bear up with his neighbors in that.  What
does he, therefore, but resolve to give over toiling, and to find
himself out some factor, to whose care and credit he may commit the
whole managing of his religious affairs; some divine of note and
estimation that must be.  To him he adheres, resigns the whole
warehouse of his religion, with all the locks and keys, into his
custody; and indeed makes the very person of that man his religion;
esteems his associating with him a sufficient evidence and
commendatory of his own piety.  So that a man may say, his religion
is now no more within himself, but is become a dividual moveable, and
goes and comes near him, according as that good man frequents the
house.  He entertains him, gives him gifts, feasts him, lodges him;
his religion comes home at night, prays, is liberally supped, and
sumptuously laid to sleep, rises, is saluted, and after the malmsey,
or some well spiced beverage, and better breakfasted than he whose
morning appetite would have gladly fed on green figs between Bethany
and Jerusalem, his religion walks abroad at eight, and leaves his
kind entertainer in the shop, trading all day without his religion."

        This picture would serve for our times.  Religion was not
invited to eat or drink or sleep with us, or to make or divide an
estate, but was a holiday guest.  Such omissions judge the church; as
the compromise made with the slaveholder, not much noticed at first,
every day appears more flagrant mischief to the American
constitution.  But now the purists are looking into all these
matters.  The more intelligent are growing uneasy on the subject of
Marriage.  They wish to see the character represented also in that
covenant.  There shall be nothing brutal in it, but it shall honor
the man and the woman, as much as the most diffusive and universal
action.  Grimly the same spirit looks into the law of Property, and
accuses men of driving a trade in the great boundless providence
which had given the air, the water, and the land to men, to use and
not to fence in and monopolize.  It casts its eye on Trade, and Day
Labor, and so it goes up and down, paving the earth with eyes,
destroying privacy, and making thorough-lights.  Is all this for
nothing?  Do you suppose that the reforms, which are preparing, will
be as superficial as those we know?

        By the books it reads and translates, judge what books it will
presently print.  A great deal of the profoundest thinking of
antiquity, which had become as good as obsolete for us, is now
re-appearing in extracts and allusions, and in twenty years will get
all printed anew.  See how daring is the reading, the speculation,
the experimenting of the time.  If now some genius shall arise who
could unite these scattered rays!  And always such a genius does
embody the ideas of each time.  Here is great variety and richness of
mysticism, each part of which now only disgusts, whilst it forms the
sole thought of some poor Perfectionist or "Comer out," yet, when it
shall be taken up as the garniture of some profound and
all-reconciling thinker, will appear the rich and appropriate
decoration of his robes.

        These reforms are our contemporaries; they are ourselves; our
own light, and sight, and conscience; they only name the relation
which subsists between us and the vicious institutions which they go
to rectify.  They are the simplest statements of man in these
matters; the plain right and wrong.  I cannot choose but allow and
honor them.  The impulse is good, and the theory; the practice is
less beautiful.  The Reformers affirm the inward life, but they do
not trust it, but use outward and vulgar means.  They do not rely on
precisely that strength which wins me to their cause; not on love,
not on a principle, but on men, on multitudes, on circumstances, on
money, on party; that is, on fear, on wrath, and pride.  The love
which lifted men to the sight of these better ends, was the true and
best distinction of this time, the disposition to trust a principle
more than a material force.  I think _that_ the soul of reform; the
conviction, that not sensualism, not slavery, not war, not
imprisonment, not even government, are needed, -- but in lieu of them
all, reliance on the sentiment of man, which will work best the more
it is trusted; not reliance on numbers, but, contrariwise, distrust
of numbers, and the feeling that then are we strongest, when most
private and alone.  The young men, who have been vexing society for
these last years with regenerative methods, seem to have made this
mistake; they all exaggerated some special means, and all failed to
see that the Reform of Reforms must be accomplished without means.

        The Reforms have their high origin in an ideal justice, but
they do not retain the purity of an idea.  They are quickly organized
in some low, inadequate form, and present no more poetic image to the
mind, than the evil tradition which they reprobated.  They mix the
fire of the moral sentiment with personal and party heats, with
measureless exaggerations, and the blindness that prefers some
darling measure to justice and truth.  Those, who are urging with
most ardor what are called the greatest benefits of mankind, are
narrow, self-pleasing, conceited men, and affect us as the insane do.
They bite us, and we run mad also.  I think the work of the reformer
as innocent as other work that is done around him; but when I have
seen it near, I do not like it better.  It is done in the same way,
it is done profanely, not piously; by management, by tactics, and
clamor.  It is a buzz in the ear.  I cannot feel any pleasure in
sacrifices which display to me such partiality of character.  We do
not want actions, but men; not a chemical drop of water, but rain;
the spirit that sheds and showers actions, countless, endless
actions.  You have on some occasion played a bold part.  You have set
your heart and face against society, when you thought it wrong, and
returned it frown for frown.  Excellent: now can you afford to forget
it, reckoning all your action no more than the passing of your hand
through the air, or a little breath of your mouth?  The world leaves
no track in space, and the greatest action of man no mark in the vast
idea.  To the youth diffident of his ability, and full of compunction
at his unprofitable existence, the temptation is always great to lend
himself to public movements, and as one of a party accomplish what he
cannot hope to effect alone.  But he must resist the degradation of a
man to a measure.  I must act with truth, though I should never come
to act, as you call it, with effect.  I must consent to inaction.  A
patience which is grand; a brave and cold neglect of the offices
which prudence exacts, so it be done in a deep, upper piety; a
consent to solitude and inaction, which proceeds out of an
unwillingness to violate character, is the century which makes the
gem.  Whilst therefore I desire to express the respect and joy I feel
before this sublime connection of reforms, now in their infancy
around us, I urge the more earnestly the paramount duties of
self-reliance.  I cannot find language of sufficient energy to convey
my sense of the sacredness of private integrity.  All men, all
things, the state, the church, yea the friends of the heart are
phantasms and unreal beside the sanctuary of the heart.  With so much
awe, with so much fear, let it be respected.

        The great majority of men, unable to judge of any principle
until its light falls on a fact, are not aware of the evil that is
around them, until they see it in some gross form, as in a class of
intemperate men, or slaveholders, or soldiers, or fraudulent persons.
Then they are greatly moved; and magnifying the importance of that
wrong, they fancy that if that abuse were redressed, all would go
well, and they fill the land with clamor to correct it.  Hence the
missionary and other religious efforts.  If every island and every
house had a Bible, if every child was brought into the Sunday School,
would the wounds of the world heal, and man be upright?

 
        But the man of ideas, accounting the circumstance nothing,
judges of the commonwealth from the state of his own mind.  `If,' he
says, `I am selfish, then is there slavery, or the effort to
establish it, wherever I go.  But if I am just, then is there no
slavery, let the laws say what they will.  For if I treat all men as
gods, how to me can there be such a thing as a slave?' But how
frivolous is your war against circumstances.  This denouncing
philanthropist is himself a slaveholder in every word and look.  Does
he free me?  Does he cheer me?  He is the state of Georgia, or
Alabama, with their sanguinary slave-laws walking here on our
north-eastern shores.  We are all thankful he has no more political
power, as we are fond of liberty ourselves.  I am afraid our virtue
is a little geographical.  I am not mortified by our vice; that is
obduracy; it colors and palters, it curses and swears, and I can see
to the end of it; but, I own, our virtue makes me ashamed; so sour
and narrow, so thin and blind, virtue so vice-like.  Then again, how
trivial seem the contests of the abolitionist, whilst he aims merely
at the circumstance of the slave.  Give the slave the least elevation
of religious sentiment, and he is no slave: you are the slave: he not
only in his humility feels his superiority, feels that much deplored
condition of his to be a fading trifle, but he makes you feel it too.
He is the master.  The exaggeration, which our young people make of
his wrongs, characterizes themselves.  What are no trifles to them,
they naturally think are no trifles to Pompey.

        We say, then, that the reforming movement is sacred in its
origin; in its management and details timid and profane.  These
benefactors hope to raise man by improving his circumstances: by
combination of that which is dead, they hope to make something alive.
In vain.  By new infusions alone of the spirit by which he is made
and directed, can he be re-made and reinforced.  The sad Pestalozzi,
who shared with all ardent spirits the hope of Europe on the outbreak
of the French Revolution, after witnessing its sequel, recorded his
conviction, that "the amelioration of outward circumstances will be
the effect, but can never be the means of mental and moral
improvement." Quitting now the class of actors, let us turn to see
how it stands with the other class of which we spoke, namely, the
students.

 
        A new disease has fallen on the life of man.  Every Age, like
every human body, has its own distemper.  Other times have had war,
or famine, or a barbarism domestic or bordering, as their antagonism.
Our forefathers walked in the world and went to their graves,
tormented with the fear of Sin, and the terror of the Day of
Judgment.  These terrors have lost their force, and our torment is
Unbelief, the Uncertainty as to what we ought to do; the distrust of
the value of what we do, and the distrust that the Necessity (which
we all at last believe in) is fair and beneficent.  Our Religion
assumes the negative form of rejection.  Out of love of the true, we
repudiate the false: and the Religion is an abolishing criticism.  A
great perplexity hangs like a cloud on the brow of all cultivated
persons, a certain imbecility in the best spirits, which
distinguishes the period.  We do not find the same trait in the
Arabian, in the Hebrew, in Greek, Roman, Norman, English periods; no,
but in other men a natural firmness.  The men did not see beyond the
need of the hour.  They planted their foot strong, and doubted
nothing.  We mistrust every step we take.  We find it the worst thing
about time, that we know not what to do with it.  We are so
sharp-sighted that we can neither work nor think, neither read Plato
nor not read him.

        Then there is what is called a too intellectual tendency.  Can
there be too much intellect?  We have never met with any such excess.
But the criticism, which is levelled at the laws and manners, ends in
thought, without causing a new method of life.  The genius of the day
does not incline to a deed, but to a beholding.  It is not that men
do not wish to act; they pine to be employed, but are paralyzed by
the uncertainty what they should do.  The inadequacy of the work to
the faculties, is the painful perception which keeps them still.
This happens to the best.  Then, talents bring their usual
temptations, and the current literature and poetry with perverse
ingenuity draw us away from life to solitude and meditation.  This
could well be borne, if it were great and involuntary; if the men
were ravished by their thought, and hurried into ascetic
extravagances.  Society could then manage to release their shoulder
from its wheel, and grant them for a time this privilege of sabbath.
But they are not so.  Thinking, which was a rage, is become an art.
The thinker gives me results, and never invites me to be present with
him at his invocation of truth, and to enjoy with him its proceeding
into his mind.

        So little action amidst such audacious and yet sincere
profession, that we begin to doubt if that great revolution in the
art of war, which has made it a game of posts instead of a game of
battles, has not operated on Reform; whether this be not also a war
of posts, a paper blockade, in which each party is to display the
utmost resources of his spirit and belief, and no conflict occur; but
the world shall take that course which the demonstration of the truth
shall indicate.

        But we must pay for being too intellectual, as they call it.
People are not as light-hearted for it.  I think men never loved life
less.  I question if care and doubt ever wrote their names so legibly
on the faces of any population.  This _Ennui_, for which we Saxons
had no name, this word of France has got a terrific significance.  It
shortens life, and bereaves the day of its light.  Old age begins in
the nursery, and before the young American is put into jacket and
trowsers, he says, `I want something which I never saw before;' and
`I wish I was not I.' I have seen the same gloom on the brow even of
those adventurers from the intellectual class, who had dived deepest
and with most success into active life.  I have seen the authentic
sign of anxiety and perplexity on the greatest forehead of the state.
The canker worms have crawled to the topmost bough of the wild elm,
and swing down from that.  Is there less oxygen in the atmosphere?
What has checked in this age the animal spirits which gave to our
forefathers their bounding pulse?

        But have a little patience with this melancholy humor.  Their
unbelief arises out of a greater Belief; their inaction out of a
scorn of inadequate action.  By the side of these men, the hot
agitators have a certain cheap and ridiculous air; they even look
smaller than the others.  Of the two, I own, I like the speculators
best.  They have some piety which looks with faith to a fair Future,
unprofaned by rash and unequal attempts to realize it.  And truly we
shall find much to console us, when we consider the cause of their
uneasiness.  It is the love of greatness, it is the need of harmony,
the contrast of the dwarfish Actual with the exorbitant Idea.  No man
can compare the ideas and aspirations of the innovators of the
present day, with those of former periods, without feeling how great
and high this criticism is.  The revolutions that impend over society
are not now from ambition and rapacity, from impatience of one or
another form of government, but from new modes of thinking, which
shall recompose society after a new order, which shall animate labor
by love and science, which shall destroy the value of many kinds of
property, and replace all property within the dominion of reason and
equity.  There was never so great a thought laboring in the breasts
of men, as now.  It almost seems as if what was aforetime spoken
fabulously and hieroglyphically, was now spoken plainly, the
doctrine, namely, of the indwelling of the Creator in man.  The
spiritualist wishes this only, that the spiritual principle should be
suffered to demonstrate itself to the end, in all possible
applications to the state of man, without the admission of anything
unspiritual, that is, anything positive, dogmatic, or personal.  The
excellence of this class consists in this, that they have believed;
that, affirming the need of new and higher modes of living and
action, they have abstained from the recommendation of low methods.
Their fault is that they have stopped at the intellectual perception;
that their will is not yet inspired from the Fountain of Love.  But
whose fault is this? and what a fault, and to what inquiry does it
lead!  We have come to that which is the spring of all power, of
beauty and virtue, of art and poetry; and who shall tell us according
to what law its inspirations and its informations are given or
withholden?

        I do not wish to be guilty of the narrowness and pedantry of
inferring the tendency and genius of the Age from a few and
insufficient facts or persons.  Every age has a thousand sides and
signs and tendencies; and it is only when surveyed from inferior
points of view, that great varieties of character appear.  Our time
too is full of activity and performance.  Is there not something
comprehensive in the grasp of a society which to great mechanical
invention, and the best institutions of property, adds the most
daring theories; which explores the subtlest and most universal
problems?  At the manifest risk of repeating what every other Age has
thought of itself, we might say, we think the Genius of this Age more
philosophical than any other has been, righter in its aims, truer,
with less fear, less fable, less mixture of any sort.

        But turn it how we will, as we ponder this meaning of the
times, every new thought drives us to the deep fact, that the Time is
the child of the Eternity.  The main interest which any aspects of
the Times can have for us, is the great spirit which gazes through
them, the light which they can shed on the wonderful questions, What
we are? and Whither we tend?  We do not wish to be deceived.  Here we
drift, like white sail across the wild ocean, now bright on the wave,
now darkling in the trough of the sea; -- but from what port did we
sail?  Who knows?  Or to what port are we bound?  Who knows?  There
is no one to tell us but such poor weather-tossed mariners as
ourselves, whom we speak as we pass, or who have hoisted some signal,
or floated to us some letter in a bottle from far.  But what know
they more than we?  They also found themselves on this wondrous sea.
No; from the older sailors, nothing.  Over all their
speaking-trumpets, the gray sea and the loud winds answer, Not in us;
not in Time.  Where then but in Ourselves, where but in that Thought
through which we communicate with absolute nature, and are made aware
that, whilst we shed the dust of which we are built, grain by grain,
till it is all gone, the law which clothes us with humanity remains
new? where, but in the intuitions which are vouchsafed us from
within, shall we learn the Truth?  Faithless, faithless, we fancy
that with the dust we depart and are not; and do not know that the
law and the perception of the law are at last one; that only as much
as the law enters us, becomes us, we are living men, -- immortal with
the immortality of this law.  Underneath all these appearances, lies
that which is, that which lives, that which causes.  This ever
renewing generation of appearances rests on a reality, and a reality
that is alive.

        To a true scholar the attraction of the aspects of nature, the
departments of life, and the passages of his experience, is simply
the information they yield him of this supreme nature which lurks
within all.  That reality, that causing force is moral.  The Moral
Sentiment is but its other name.  It makes by its presence or absence
right and wrong, beauty and ugliness, genius or depravation.  As the
granite comes to the surface, and towers into the highest mountains,
and, if we dig down, we find it below the superficial strata, so in
all the details of our domestic or civil life, is hidden the
elemental reality, which ever and anon comes to the surface, and
forms the grand men, who are the leaders and examples, rather than
the companions of the race.  The granite is curiously concealed under
a thousand formations and surfaces, under fertile soils, and grasses,
and flowers, under well-manured, arable fields, and large towns and
cities, but it makes the foundation of these, and is always
indicating its presence by slight but sure signs.  So is it with the
Life of our life; so close does that also hide.  I read it in glad
and in weeping eyes: I read it in the pride and in the humility of
people: it is recognized in every bargain and in every complaisance,
in every criticism, and in all praise: it is voted for at elections;
it wins the cause with juries; it rides the stormy eloquence of the
senate, sole victor; histories are written of it, holidays decreed to
it; statues, tombs, churches, built to its honor; yet men seem to
fear and to shun it, when it comes barely to view in our immediate
neighborhood.

        For that reality let us stand: that let us serve, and for that
speak.  Only as far as _that_ shines through them, are these times or
any times worth consideration.  I wish to speak of the politics,
education, business, and religion around us, without ceremony or
false deference.  You will absolve me from the charge of flippancy,
or malignity, or the desire to say smart things at the expense of
whomsoever, when you see that reality is all we prize, and that we
are bound on our entrance into nature to speak for that.  Let it not
be recorded in our own memories, that in this moment of the Eternity,
when we who were named by our names, flitted across the light, we
were afraid of any fact, or disgraced the fair Day by a pusillanimous
preference of our bread to our freedom.  What is the scholar, what is
the man _for_, but for hospitality to every new thought of his time?
Have you leisure, power, property, friends? you shall be the asylum
and patron of every new thought, every unproven opinion, every
untried project, which proceeds out of good will and honest seeking.
All the newspapers, all the tongues of to-day will of course at first
defame what is noble; but you who hold not of to-day, not of the
times, but of the Everlasting, are to stand for it: and the highest
compliment man ever receives from heaven, is the sending to him its
disguised and discredited angels.
.
        ESSAYS
        _First Series_
        by Ralph Waldo Emerson

 
        HISTORY
 
        -----
 
        There is no great and no small
        To the Soul that maketh all:
        And where it cometh, all things are;
        And it cometh everywhere.

 
        I am owner of the sphere,
        Of the seven stars and the solar year,
        Of Caesar's hand, and Plato's brain,
        Of Lord Christ's heart, and Shakspeare's strain.

 
        ESSAY I _History_
 
        There is one mind common to all individual men.  Every man is
an inlet to the same and to all of the same.  He that is once
admitted to the right of reason is made a freeman of the whole
estate.  What Plato has thought, he may think; what a saint has felt,
he may feel; what at any time has be-fallen any man, he can
understand.  Who hath access to this universal mind is a party to all
that is or can be done, for this is the only and sovereign agent.

        Of the works of this mind history is the record.  Its genius is
illustrated by the entire series of days.  Man is explicable by
nothing less than all his history.  Without hurry, without rest, the
human spirit goes forth from the beginning to embody every faculty,
every thought, every emotion, which belongs to it in appropriate
events.  But the thought is always prior to the fact; all the facts
of history preexist in the mind as laws.  Each law in turn is made by
circumstances predominant, and the limits of nature give power to but
one at a time.  A man is the whole encyclopaedia of facts.  The
creation of a thousand forests is in one acorn, and Egypt, Greece,
Rome, Gaul, Britain, America, lie folded already in the first man.
Epoch after epoch, camp, kingdom, empire, republic, democracy, are
merely the application of his manifold spirit to the manifold world.

        This human mind wrote history, and this must read it.  The
Sphinx must solve her own riddle.  If the whole of history is in one
man, it is all to be explained from individual experience.  There is
a relation between the hours of our life and the centuries of time.
As the air I breathe is drawn from the great repositories of nature,
as the light on my book is yielded by a star a hundred millions of
miles distant, as the poise of my body depends on the equilibrium of
centrifugal and centripetal forces, so the hours should be instructed
by the ages, and the ages explained by the hours.  Of the universal
mind each individual man is one more incarnation.  All its properties
consist in him.  Each new fact in his private experience flashes a
light on what great bodies of men have done, and the crises of his
life refer to national crises.  Every revolution was first a thought
in one man's mind, and when the same thought occurs to another man,
it is the key to that era.  Every reform was once a private opinion,
and when it shall be a private opinion again, it will solve the
problem of the age.  The fact narrated must correspond to something
in me to be credible or intelligible.  We as we read must become
Greeks, Romans, Turks, priest and king, martyr and executioner, must
fasten these images to some reality in our secret experience, or we
shall learn nothing rightly.  What befell Asdrubal or Caesar Borgia
is as much an illustration of the mind's powers and depravations as
what has befallen us.  Each new law and political movement has
meaning for you.  Stand before each of its tablets and say, `Under
this mask did my Proteus nature hide itself.' This remedies the
defect of our too great nearness to ourselves.  This throws our
actions into perspective: and as crabs, goats, scorpions, the
balance, and the waterpot lose their meanness when hung as signs in
the zodiac, so I can see my own vices without heat in the distant
persons of Solomon, Alcibiades, and Catiline.

        It is the universal nature which gives worth to particular men
and things.  Human life as containing this is mysterious and
inviolable, and we hedge it round with penalties and laws.  All laws
derive hence their ultimate reason; all express more or less
distinctly some command of this supreme, illimitable essence.
Property also holds of the soul, covers great spiritual facts, and
instinctively we at first hold to it with swords and laws, and wide
and complex combinations.  The obscure consciousness of this fact is
the light of all our day, the claim of claims; the plea for
education, for justice, for charity, the foundation of friendship and
love, and of the heroism and grandeur which belong to acts of
self-reliance.  It is remarkable that involuntarily we always read as
superior beings.  Universal history, the poets, the romancers, do not
in their stateliest pictures -- in the sacerdotal, the imperial
palaces, in the triumphs of will or of genius -- anywhere lose our
ear, anywhere make us feel that we intrude, that this is for better
men; but rather is it true, that in their grandest strokes we feel
most at home.  All that Shakspeare says of the king, yonder slip of a
boy that reads in the corner feels to be true of himself.  We
sympathize in the great moments of history, in the great discoveries,
the great resistances, the great prosperities of men; -- because
there law was enacted, the sea was searched, the land was found, or
the blow was struck _for us_, as we ourselves in that place would
have done or applauded.

        We have the same interest in condition and character.  We honor
the rich, because they have externally the freedom, power, and grace
which we feel to be proper to man, proper to us.  So all that is said
of the wise man by Stoic, or oriental or modern essayist, describes
to each reader his own idea, describes his unattained but attainable
self.  All literature writes the character of the wise man.  Books,
monuments, pictures, conversation, are portraits in which he finds
the lineaments he is forming.  The silent and the eloquent praise him
and accost him, and he is stimulated wherever he moves as by personal
allusions.  A true aspirant, therefore, never needs look for
allusions personal and laudatory in discourse.  He hears the
commendation, not of himself, but more sweet, of that character he
seeks, in every word that is said concerning character, yea, further,
in every fact and circumstance, -- in the running river and the
rustling corn.  Praise is looked, homage tendered, love flows from
mute nature, from the mountains and the lights of the firmament.

        These hints, dropped as it were from sleep and night, let us
use in broad day.  The student is to read history actively and not
passively; to esteem his own life the text, and books the commentary.
Thus compelled, the Muse of history will utter oracles, as never to
those who do not respect themselves.  I have no expectation that any
man will read history aright, who thinks that what was done in a
remote age, by men whose names have resounded far, has any deeper
sense than what he is doing to-day.

        The world exists for the education of each man.  There is no
age or state of society or mode of action in history, to which there
is not somewhat corresponding in his life.  Every thing tends in a
wonderful manner to abbreviate itself and yield its own virtue to
him.  He should see that he can live all history in his own person.
He must sit solidly at home, and not suffer himself to be bullied by
kings or empires, but know that he is greater than all the geography
and all the government of the world; he must transfer the point of
view from which history is commonly read, from Rome and Athens and
London to himself, and not deny his conviction that he is the court,
and if England or Egypt have any thing to say to him, he will try the
case; if not, let them for ever be silent.  He must attain and
maintain that lofty sight where facts yield their secret sense, and
poetry and annals are alike.  The instinct of the mind, the purpose
of nature, betrays itself in the use we make of the signal narrations
of history.  Time dissipates to shining ether the solid angularity of
facts.  No anchor, no cable, no fences, avail to keep a fact a fact.
Babylon, Troy, Tyre, Palestine, and even early Rome, are passing
already into fiction.  The Garden of Eden, the sun standing still in
Gibeon, is poetry thenceforward to all nations.  Who cares what the
fact was, when we have made a constellation of it to hang in heaven
an immortal sign?  London and Paris and New York must go the same
way.  "What is History," said Napoleon, "but a fable agreed upon?"
This life of ours is stuck round with Egypt, Greece, Gaul, England,
War, Colonization, Church, Court, and Commerce, as with so many
flowers and wild ornaments grave and gay.  I will not make more
account of them.  I believe in Eternity.  I can find Greece, Asia,
Italy, Spain, and the Islands, -- the genius and creative principle
of each and of all eras in my own mind.

        We are always coming up with the emphatic facts of history in
our private experience, and verifying them here.  All history becomes
subjective; in other words, there is properly no history; only
biography.  Every mind must know the whole lesson for itself, -- must
go over the whole ground.  What it does not see, what it does not
live, it will not know.  What the former age has epitomized into a
formula or rule for manipular convenience, it will lose all the good
of verifying for itself, by means of the wall of that rule.
Somewhere, sometime, it will demand and find compensation for that
loss by doing the work itself.  Ferguson discovered many things in
astronomy which had long been known.  The better for him.

        History must be this or it is nothing.  Every law which the
state enacts indicates a fact in human nature; that is all.  We must
in ourselves see the necessary reason of every fact, -- see how it
could and must be.  So stand before every public and private work;
before an oration of Burke, before a victory of Napoleon, before a
martyrdom of Sir Thomas More, of Sidney, of Marmaduke Robinson,
before a French Reign of Terror, and a Salem hanging of witches,
before a fanatic Revival, and the Animal Magnetism in Paris, or in
Providence.  We assume that we under like influence should be alike
affected, and should achieve the like; and we aim to master
intellectually the steps, and reach the same height or the same
degradation, that our fellow, our proxy, has done.

        All inquiry into antiquity, -- all curiosity respecting the
Pyramids, the excavated cities, Stonehenge, the Ohio Circles, Mexico,
Memphis, -- is the desire to do away this wild, savage, and
preposterous There or Then, and introduce in its place the Here and
the Now.  Belzoni digs and measures in the mummy-pits and pyramids of
Thebes, until he can see the end of the difference between the
monstrous work and himself.  When he has satisfied himself, in
general and in detail, that it was made by such a person as he, so
armed and so motived, and to ends to which he himself should also
have worked, the problem is solved; his thought lives along the whole
line of temples and sphinxes and catacombs, passes through them all
with satisfaction, and they live again to the mind, or are _now_.

        A Gothic cathedral affirms that it was done by us, and not done
by us.  Surely it was by man, but we find it not in our man.  But we
apply ourselves to the history of its production.  We put ourselves
into the place and state of the builder.  We remember the
forest-dwellers, the first temples, the adherence to the first type,
and the decoration of it as the wealth of the nation increased; the
value which is given to wood by carving led to the carving over the
whole mountain of stone of a cathedral.  When we have gone through
this process, and added thereto the Catholic Church, its cross, its
music, its processions, its Saints' days and image-worship, we have,
as it were, been the man that made the minster; we have seen how it
could and must be.  We have the sufficient reason.

        The difference between men is in their principle of
association.  Some men classify objects by color and size and other
accidents of appearance; others by intrinsic likeness, or by the
relation of cause and effect.  The progress of the intellect is to
the clearer vision of causes, which neglects surface differences.  To
the poet, to the philosopher, to the saint, all things are friendly
and sacred, all events profitable, all days holy, all men divine.
For the eye is fastened on the life, and slights the circumstance.
Every chemical substance, every plant, every animal in its growth,
teaches the unity of cause, the variety of appearance.

        Upborne and surrounded as we are by this all-creating nature,
soft and fluid as a cloud or the air, why should we be such hard
pedants, and magnify a few forms?  Why should we make account of
time, or of magnitude, or of figure?  The soul knows them not, and
genius, obeying its law, knows how to play with them as a young child
plays with graybeards and in churches.  Genius studies the causal
thought, and, far back in the womb of things, sees the rays parting
from one orb, that diverge ere they fall by infinite diameters.
Genius watches the monad through all his masks as he performs the
metempsychosis of nature.  Genius detects through the fly, through
the caterpillar, through the grub, through the egg, the constant
individual; through countless individuals, the fixed species; through
many species, the genus; through all genera, the steadfast type;
through all the kingdoms of organized life, the eternal unity.
Nature is a mutable cloud, which is always and never the same.  She
casts the same thought into troops of forms, as a poet makes twenty
fables with one moral.  Through the bruteness and toughness of
matter, a subtle spirit bends all things to its own will.  The
adamant streams into soft but precise form before it, and, whilst I
look at it, its outline and texture are changed again.  Nothing is so
fleeting as form; yet never does it quite deny itself.  In man we
still trace the remains or hints of all that we esteem badges of
servitude in the lower races; yet in him they enhance his nobleness
and grace; as Io, in Aeschylus, transformed to a cow, offends the
imagination; but how changed, when as Isis in Egypt she meets
Osiris-Jove, a beautiful woman, with nothing of the metamorphosis
left but the lunar horns as the splendid ornament of her brows!

        The identity of history is equally intrinsic, the diversity
equally obvious.  There is at the surface infinite variety of things;
at the centre there is simplicity of cause.  How many are the acts of
one man in which we recognize the same character!  Observe the
sources of our information in respect to the Greek genius.  We have
the _civil history_ of that people, as Herodotus, Thucydides,
Xenophon, and Plutarch have given it; a very sufficient account of
what manner of persons they were, and what they did.  We have the
same national mind expressed for us again in their _literature_, in
epic and lyric poems, drama, and philosophy; a very complete form.
Then we have it once more in their _architecture_, a beauty as of
temperance itself, limited to the straight line and the square, -- a
builded geometry.  Then we have it once again in _sculpture_, the
"tongue on the balance of expression," a multitude of forms in the
utmost freedom of action, and never transgressing the ideal serenity;
like votaries performing some religious dance before the gods, and,
though in convulsive pain or mortal combat, never daring to break the
figure and decorum of their dance.  Thus, of the genius of one
remarkable people, we have a fourfold representation: and to the
senses what more unlike than an ode of Pindar, a marble centaur, the
peristyle of the Parthenon, and the last actions of Phocion?

        Every one must have observed faces and forms which, without any
resembling feature, make a like impression on the beholder.  A
particular picture or copy of verses, if it do not awaken the same
train of images, will yet superinduce the same sentiment as some wild
mountain walk, although the resemblance is nowise obvious to the
senses, but is occult and out of the reach of the understanding.
Nature is an endless combination and repetition of a very few laws.
She hums the old well-known air through innumerable variations.

        Nature is full of a sublime family likeness throughout her
works; and delights in startling us with resemblances in the most
unexpected quarters.  I have seen the head of an old sachem of the
forest, which at once reminded the eye of a bald mountain summit, and
the furrows of the brow suggested the strata of the rock.  There are
men whose manners have the same essential splendor as the simple and
awful sculpture on the friezes of the Parthenon, and the remains of
the earliest Greek art.  And there are compositions of the same
strain to be found in the books of all ages.  What is Guido's
Rospigliosi Aurora but a morning thought, as the horses in it are
only a morning cloud.  If any one will but take pains to observe the
variety of actions to which he is equally inclined in certain moods
of mind, and those to which he is averse, he will see how deep is the
chain of affinity.

        A painter told me that nobody could draw a tree without in some
sort becoming a tree; or draw a child by studying the outlines of its
form merely, -- but, by watching for a time his motions and plays,
the painter enters into his nature, and can then draw him at will in
every attitude.  So Roos "entered into the inmost nature of a sheep."
I knew a draughtsman employed in a public survey, who found that he
could not sketch the rocks until their geological structure was first
explained to him.  In a certain state of thought is the common origin
of very diverse works.  It is the spirit and not the fact that is
identical.  By a deeper apprehension, and not primarily by a painful
acquisition of many manual skills, the artist attains the power of
awakening other souls to a given activity.

        It has been said, that "common souls pay with what they do;
nobler souls with that which they are." And why?  Because a profound
nature awakens in us by its actions and words, by its very looks and
manners, the same power and beauty that a gallery of sculpture, or of
pictures, addresses.

        Civil and natural history, the history of art and of
literature, must be explained from individual history, or must remain
words.  There is nothing but is related to us, nothing that does not
interest us, -- kingdom, college, tree, horse, or iron shoe, the
roots of all things are in man.  Santa Croce and the Dome of St.
Peter's are lame copies after a divine model.  Strasburg Cathedral is
a material counterpart of the soul of Erwin of Steinbach.  The true
poem is the poet's mind; the true ship is the ship-builder.  In the
man, could we lay him open, we should see the reason for the last
flourish and tendril of his work; as every spine and tint in the
sea-shell preexist in the secreting organs of the fish.  The whole of
heraldry and of chivalry is in courtesy.  A man of fine manners shall
pronounce your name with all the ornament that titles of nobility
could ever add.

        The trivial experience of every day is always verifying some
old prediction to us, and converting into things the words and signs
which we had heard and seen without heed.  A lady, with whom I was
riding in the forest, said to me, that the woods always seemed to her
_to wait_, as if the genii who inhabit them suspended their deeds
until the wayfarer has passed onward: a thought which poetry has
celebrated in the dance of the fairies, which breaks off on the
approach of human feet.  The man who has seen the rising moon break
out of the clouds at midnight has been present like an archangel at
the creation of light and of the world.  I remember one summer day,
in the fields, my companion pointed out to me a broad cloud, which
might extend a quarter of a mile parallel to the horizon, quite
accurately in the form of a cherub as painted over churches, -- a
round block in the centre, which it was easy to animate with eyes and
mouth, supported on either side by wide-stretched symmetrical wings.
What appears once in the atmosphere may appear often, and it was
undoubtedly the archetype of that familiar ornament.  I have seen in
the sky a chain of summer lightning which at once showed to me that
the Greeks drew from nature when they painted the thunderbolt in the
hand of Jove.  I have seen a snow-drift along the sides of the stone
wall which obviously gave the idea of the common architectural scroll
to abut a tower.

        By surrounding ourselves with the original circumstances, we
invent anew the orders and the ornaments of architecture, as we see
how each people merely decorated its primitive abodes.  The Doric
temple preserves the semblance of the wooden cabin in which the
Dorian dwelt.  The Chinese pagoda is plainly a Tartar tent.  The
Indian and Egyptian temples still betray the mounds and subterranean
houses of their forefathers.  "The custom of making houses and tombs
in the living rock," says Heeren, in his Researches on the
Ethiopians, "determined very naturally the principal character of the
Nubian Egyptian architecture to the colossal form which it assumed.
In these caverns, already prepared by nature, the eye was accustomed
to dwell on huge shapes and masses, so that, when art came to the
assistance of nature, it could not move on a small scale without
degrading itself.  What would statues of the usual size, or neat
porches and wings, have been, associated with those gigantic halls
before which only Colossi could sit as watchmen, or lean on the
pillars of the interior?"

        The Gothic church plainly originated in a rude adaptation of
the forest trees with all their boughs to a festal or solemn arcade,
as the bands about the cleft pillars still indicate the green withes
that tied them.  No one can walk in a road cut through pine woods,
without being struck with the architectural appearance of the grove,
especially in winter, when the bareness of all other trees shows the
low arch of the Saxons.  In the woods in a winter afternoon one will
see as readily the origin of the stained glass window, with which the
Gothic cathedrals are adorned, in the colors of the western sky seen
through the bare and crossing branches of the forest.  Nor can any
lover of nature enter the old piles of Oxford and the English
cathedrals, without feeling that the forest overpowered the mind of
the builder, and that his chisel, his saw, and plane still reproduced
its ferns, its spikes of flowers, its locust, elm, oak, pine, fir,
and spruce.

        The Gothic cathedral is a blossoming in stone subdued by the
insatiable demand of harmony in man.  The mountain of granite blooms
into an eternal flower, with the lightness and delicate finish, as
well as the aerial proportions and perspective, of vegetable beauty.

        In like manner, all public facts are to be individualized, all
private facts are to be generalized.  Then at once History becomes
fluid and true, and Biography deep and sublime.  As the Persian
imitated in the slender shafts and capitals of his architecture the
stem and flower of the lotus and palm, so the Persian court in its
magnificent era never gave over the nomadism of its barbarous tribes,
but travelled from Ecbatana, where the spring was spent, to Susa in
summer, and to Babylon for the winter.

        In the early history of Asia and Africa, Nomadism and
Agriculture are the two antagonist facts.  The geography of Asia and
of Africa necessitated a nomadic life.  But the nomads were the
terror of all those whom the soil, or the advantages of a market, had
induced to build towns.  Agriculture, therefore, was a religious
injunction, because of the perils of the state from nomadism.  And in
these late and civil countries of England and America, these
propensities still fight out the old battle in the nation and in the
individual.  The nomads of Africa were constrained to wander by the
attacks of the gad-fly, which drives the cattle mad, and so compels
the tribe to emigrate in the rainy season, and to drive off the
cattle to the higher sandy regions.  The nomads of Asia follow the
pasturage from month to month.  In America and Europe, the nomadism
is of trade and curiosity; a progress, certainly, from the gad-fly of
Astaboras to the Anglo and Italo-mania of Boston Bay.  Sacred cities,
to which a periodical religious pilgrimage was enjoined, or stringent
laws and customs, tending to invigorate the national bond, were the
check on the old rovers; and the cumulative values of long residence
are the restraints on the itineracy of the present day.  The
antagonism of the two tendencies is not less active in individuals,
as the love of adventure or the love of repose happens to
predominate.  A man of rude health and flowing spirits has the
faculty of rapid domestication, lives in his wagon, and roams through
all latitudes as easily as a Calmuc.  At sea, or in the forest, or in
the snow, he sleeps as warm, dines with as good appetite, and
associates as happily, as beside his own chimneys.  Or perhaps his
facility is deeper seated, in the increased range of his faculties of
observation, which yield him points of interest wherever fresh
objects meet his eyes.  The pastoral nations were needy and hungry to
desperation; and this intellectual nomadism, in its excess, bankrupts
the mind, through the dissipation of power on a miscellany of
objects.  The home-keeping wit, on the other hand, is that continence
or content which finds all the elements of life in its own soil; and
which has its own perils of monotony and deterioration, if not
stimulated by foreign infusions.

        Every thing the individual sees without him corresponds to his
states of mind, and every thing is in turn intelligible to him, as
his onward thinking leads him into the truth to which that fact or
series belongs.

        The primeval world, -- the Fore-World, as the Germans say, -- I
can dive to it in myself as well as grope for it with researching
fingers in catacombs, libraries, and the broken reliefs and torsos of
ruined villas.

        What is the foundation of that interest all men feel in Greek
history, letters, art, and poetry, in all its periods, from the
Heroic or Homeric age down to the domestic life of the Athenians and
Spartans, four or five centuries later?  What but this, that every
man passes personally through a Grecian period.  The Grecian state is
the era of the bodily nature, the perfection of the senses, -- of the
spiritual nature unfolded in strict unity with the body.  In it
existed those human forms which supplied the sculptor with his models
of Hercules, Ph;oebus, and Jove; not like the forms abounding in the
streets of modern cities, wherein the face is a confused blur of
features, but composed of incorrupt, sharply defined, and symmetrical
features, whose eye-sockets are so formed that it would be impossible
for such eyes to squint, and take furtive glances on this side and on
that, but they must turn the whole head.  The manners of that period
are plain and fierce.  The reverence exhibited is for personal
qualities, courage, address, self-command, justice, strength,
swiftness, a loud voice, a broad chest.  Luxury and elegance are not
known.  A sparse population and want make every man his own valet,
cook, butcher, and soldier, and the habit of supplying his own needs
educates the body to wonderful performances.  Such are the Agamemnon
and Diomed of Homer, and not far different is the picture Xenophon
gives of himself and his compatriots in the Retreat of the Ten
Thousand.  "After the army had crossed the river Teleboas in Armenia,
there fell much snow, and the troops lay miserably on the ground
covered with it.  But Xenophon arose naked, and, taking an axe, began
to split wood; whereupon others rose and did the like."  Throughout
his army exists a boundless liberty of speech.  They quarrel for
plunder, they wrangle with the generals on each new order, and
Xenophon is as sharp-tongued as any, and sharper-tongued than most,
and so gives as good as he gets.  Who does not see that this is a
gang of great boys, with such a code of honor and such lax discipline
as great boys have?

        The costly charm of the ancient tragedy, and indeed of all the
old literature, is, that the persons speak simply, -- speak as
persons who have great good sense without knowing it, before yet the
reflective habit has become the predominant habit of the mind.  Our
admiration of the antique is not admiration of the old, but of the
natural.  The Greeks are not reflective, but perfect in their senses
and in their health, with the finest physical organization in the
world.  Adults acted with the simplicity and grace of children.  They
made vases, tragedies, and statues, such as healthy senses
should,---- that is, in good taste.  Such things have continued to be
made in all ages, and are now, wherever a healthy physique exists;
but, as a class, from their superior organization, they have
surpassed all.  They combine the energy of manhood with the engaging
unconsciousness of childhood.  The attraction of these manners is
that they belong to man, and are known to every man in virtue of his
being once a child; besides that there are always individuals who
retain these characteristics.  A person of childlike genius and
inborn energy is still a Greek, and revives our love of the Muse of
Hellas.  I admire the love of nature in the Philoctetes.  In reading
those fine apostrophes to sleep, to the stars, rocks, mountains, and
waves, I feel time passing away as an ebbing sea.  I feel the
eternity of man, the identity of his thought.  The Greek had, it
seems, the same fellow-beings as I.  The sun and moon, water and
fire, met his heart precisely as they meet mine.  Then the vaunted
distinction between Greek and English, between Classic and Romantic
schools, seems superficial and pedantic.  When a thought of Plato
becomes a thought to me, -- when a truth that fired the soul of
Pindar fires mine, time is no more.  When I feel that we two meet in
a perception, that our two souls are tinged with the same hue, and
do, as it were, run into one, why should I measure degrees of
latitude, why should I count Egyptian years?

        The student interprets the age of chivalry by his own age of
chivalry, and the days of maritime adventure and circumnavigation by
quite parallel miniature experiences of his own.  To the sacred
history of the world, he has the same key.  When the voice of a
prophet out of the deeps of antiquity merely echoes to him a
sentiment of his infancy, a prayer of his youth, he then pierces to
the truth through all the confusion of tradition and the caricature
of institutions.

        Rare, extravagant spirits come by us at intervals, who disclose
to us new facts in nature.  I see that men of God have, from time to
time, walked among men and made their commission felt in the heart
and soul of the commonest hearer.  Hence, evidently, the tripod, the
priest, the priestess inspired by the divine afflatus.

        Jesus astonishes and overpowers sensual people.  They cannot
unite him to history, or reconcile him with themselves.  As they come
to revere their intuitions and aspire to live holily, their own piety
explains every fact, every word.

 
        How easily these old worships of Moses, of Zoroaster, of Menu,
of Socrates, domesticate themselves in the mind.  I cannot find any
antiquity in them.  They are mine as much as theirs.

        I have seen the first monks and anchorets without crossing seas
or centuries.  More than once some individual has appeared to me with
such negligence of labor and such commanding contemplation, a haughty
beneficiary, begging in the name of God, as made good to the
nineteenth century Simeon the Stylite, the Thebais, and the first
Capuchins.

        The priestcraft of the East and West, of the Magian, Brahmin,
Druid, and Inca, is expounded in the individual's private life.  The
cramping influence of a hard formalist on a young child in repressing
his spirits and courage, paralyzing the understanding, and that
without producing indignation, but only fear and obedience, and even
much sympathy with the tyranny, -- is a familiar fact explained to
the child when he becomes a man, only by seeing that the oppressor of
his youth is himself a child tyrannized over by those names and words
and forms, of whose influence he was merely the organ to the youth.
The fact teaches him how Belus was worshipped, and how the Pyramids
were built, better than the discovery by Champollion of the names of
all the workmen and the cost of every tile.  He finds Assyria and the
Mounds of Cholula at his door, and himself has laid the courses.

        Again, in that protest which each considerate person makes
against the superstition of his times, he repeats step for step the
part of old reformers, and in the search after truth finds like them
new perils to virtue.  He learns again what moral vigor is needed to
supply the girdle of a superstition.  A great licentiousness treads
on the heels of a reformation.  How many times in the history of the
world has the Luther of the day had to lament the decay of piety in
his own household!  "Doctor," said his wife to Martin Luther, one
day, "how is it that, whilst subject to papacy, we prayed so often
and with such fervor, whilst now we pray with the utmost coldness and
very seldom?"

        The advancing man discovers how deep a property he has in
literature, -- in all fable as well as in all history.  He finds that
the poet was no odd fellow who described strange and impossible
situations, but that universal man wrote by his pen a confession true
for one and true for all.  His own secret biography he finds in lines
wonderfully intelligible to him, dotted down before he was born.  One
after another he comes up in his private adventures with every fable
of Aesop, of Homer, of Hafiz, of Ariosto, of Chaucer, of Scott, and
verifies them with his own head and hands.

        The beautiful fables of the Greeks, being proper creations of
the imagination and not of the fancy, are universal verities.  What a
range of meanings and what perpetual pertinence has the story of
Prometheus!  Beside its primary value as the first chapter of the
history of Europe, (the mythology thinly veiling authentic facts, the
invention of the mechanic arts, and the migration of colonies,) it
gives the history of religion with some closeness to the faith of
later ages.  Prometheus is the Jesus of the old mythology.  He is the
friend of man; stands between the unjust "justice" of the Eternal
Father and the race of mortals, and readily suffers all things on
their account.  But where it departs from the Calvinistic
Christianity, and exhibits him as the defier of Jove, it represents a
state of mind which readily appears wherever the doctrine of Theism
is taught in a crude, objective form, and which seems the
self-defence of man against this untruth, namely, a discontent with
the believed fact that a God exists, and a feeling that the
obligation of reverence is onerous.  It would steal, if it could, the
fire of the Creator, and live apart from him, and independent of him.
The Prometheus Vinctus is the romance of skepticism.  Not less true
to all time are the details of that stately apologue.  Apollo kept
the flocks of Admetus, said the poets.  When the gods come among men,
they are not known.  Jesus was not; Socrates and Shakspeare were not.
Antaeus was suffocated by the gripe of Hercules, but every time he
touched his mother earth, his strength was renewed.  Man is the
broken giant, and, in all his weakness, both his body and his mind
are invigorated by habits of conversation with nature.  The power of
music, the power of poetry to unfix, and, as it were, clap wings to
solid nature, interprets the riddle of Orpheus.  The philosophical
perception of identity through endless mutations of form makes him
know the Proteus.  What else am I who laughed or wept yesterday, who
slept last night like a corpse, and this morning stood and ran?  And
what see I on any side but the transmigrations of Proteus?  I can
symbolize my thought by using the name of any creature, of any fact,
because every creature is man agent or patient.  Tantalus is but a
name for you and me.  Tantalus means the impossibility of drinking
the waters of thought which are always gleaming and waving within
sight of the soul.  The transmigration of souls is no fable.  I would
it were; but men and women are only half human.  Every animal of the
barn-yard, the field, and the forest, of the earth and of the waters
that are under the earth, has contrived to get a footing and to leave
the print of its features and form in some one or other of these
upright, heaven-facing speakers.  Ah! brother, stop the ebb of thy
soul, -- ebbing downward into the forms into whose habits thou hast
now for many years slid.  As near and proper to us is also that old
fable of the Sphinx, who was said to sit in the road-side and put
riddles to every passenger.  If the man could not answer, she
swallowed him alive.  If he could solve the riddle, the Sphinx was
slain.  What is our life but an endless flight of winged facts or
events!  In splendid variety these changes come, all putting
questions to the human spirit.  Those men who cannot answer by a
superior wisdom these facts or questions of time, serve them.  Facts
encumber them, tyrannize over them, and make the men of routine the
men of _sense_, in whom a literal obedience to facts has extinguished
every spark of that light by which man is truly man.  But if the man
is true to his better instincts or sentiments, and refuses the
dominion of facts, as one that comes of a higher race, remains fast
by the soul and sees the principle, then the facts fall aptly and
supple into their places; they know their master, and the meanest of
them glorifies him.

        See in Goethe's Helena the same desire that every word should
be a thing.  These figures, he would say, these Chirons, Griffins,
Phorkyas, Helen, and Leda, are somewhat, and do exert a specific
influence on the mind.  So far then are they eternal entities, as
real to-day as in the first Olympiad.  Much revolving them, he writes
out freely his humor, and gives them body tohis own imagination.  And
although that poem be as vague and fantastic as a dream, yet is it
much more attractive than the more regular dramatic pieces of the
same author, for the reason that it operates a wonderful relief to
the mind from the routine of customary images, -- awakens the
reader's invention and fancy by the wild freedom of the design, and
by the unceasing succession of brisk shocks of surprise.

        The universal nature, too strong for the petty nature of the
bard, sits on his neck and writes through his hand; so that when he
seems to vent a mere caprice and wild romance, the issue is an exact
allegory.  Hence Plato said that "poets utter great and wise things
which they do not themselves understand." All the fictions of the
Middle Age explain themselves as a masked or frolic expression of
that which in grave earnest the mind of that period toiled to
achieve.  Magic, and all that is ascribed to it, is a deep
presentiment of the powers of science.  The shoes of swiftness, the
sword of sharpness, the power of subduing the elements, of using the
secret virtues of minerals, of understanding the voices of birds, are
the obscure efforts of the mind in a right direction.  The
preternatural prowess of the hero, the gift of perpetual youth, and
the like, are alike the endeavour of the human spirit "to bend the
shows of things to the desires of the mind."

        In Perceforest and Amadis de Gaul, a garland and a rose bloom
on the head of her who is faithful, and fade on the brow of the
inconstant.  In the story of the Boy and the Mantle, even a mature
reader may be surprised with a glow of virtuous pleasure at the
triumph of the gentle Genelas; and, indeed, all the postulates of
elfin annals, -- that the fairies do not like to be named; that their
gifts are capricious and not to be trusted; that who seeks a treasure
must not speak; and the like, -- I find true in Concord, however they
might be in Cornwall or Bretagne.

        Is it otherwise in the newest romance?  I read the Bride of
Lammermoor.  Sir William Ashton is a mask for a vulgar temptation,
Ravenswood Castle a fine name for proud poverty, and the foreign
mission of state only a Bunyan disguise for honest industry.  We may
all shoot a wild bull that would toss the good and beautiful, by
fighting down the unjust and sensual.  Lucy Ashton is another name
for fidelity, which is always beautiful and always liable to calamity
in this world.
        -----------

        But along with the civil and metaphysical history of man,
another history goes daily forward, -- that of the external world, --
in which he is not less strictly implicated.  He is the compend of
time; he is also the correlative of nature.  His power consists in
the multitude of his affinities, in the fact that his life is
intertwined with the whole chain of organic and inorganic being.  In
old Rome the public roads beginning at the Forum proceeded north,
south, east, west, to the centre of every province of the empire,
making each market-town of Persia, Spain, and Britain pervious to the
soldiers of the capital: so out of the human heart go, as it were,
highways to the heart of every object in nature, to reduce it under
the dominion of man.  A man is a bundle of relations, a knot of
roots, whose flower and fruitage is the world.  His faculties refer
to natures out of him, and predict the world he is to inhabit, as the
fins of the fish foreshow that water exists, or the wings of an eagle
in the egg presuppose air.  He cannot live without a world.  Put
Napoleon in an island prison, let his faculties find no men to act
on, no Alps to climb, no stake to play for, and he would beat the air
and appear stupid.  Transport him to large countries, dense
population, complex interests, and antagonist power, and you shall
see that the man Napoleon, bounded, that is, by such a profile and
outline, is not the virtual Napoleon.  This is but Talbot's shadow;

                "His substance is not here:
        For what you see is but the smallest part
        And least proportion of humanity;
        But were the whole frame here,
        It is of such a spacious, lofty pitch,
        Your roof were not sufficient to contain it."
        _Henry VI._

        Columbus needs a planet to shape his course upon.  Newton and
Laplace need myriads of ages and thick-strewn celestial areas.  One
may say a gravitating solar system is already prophesied in the
nature of Newton's mind.  Not less does the brain of Davy or of
Gay-Lussac, from childhood exploring the affinities and repulsions of
particles, anticipate the laws of organization.  Does not the eye of
the human embryo predict the light? the ear of Handel predict the
witchcraft of harmonic sound?  Do not the constructive fingers of
Watt, Fulton, Whittemore, Arkwright, predict the fusible, hard, and
temperable texture of metals, the properties of stone, water, and
wood?  Do not the lovely attributes of the maiden child predict the
refinements and decorations of civil society?  Here also we are
reminded of the action of man on man.  A mind might ponder its
thought for ages, and not gain so much self-knowledge as the passion
of love shall teach it in a day.  Who knows himself before he has
been thrilled with indignation at an outrage, or has heard an
eloquent tongue, or has shared the throb of thousands in a national
exultation or alarm?  No man can antedate his experience, or guess
what faculty or feeling a new object shall unlock, any more than he
can draw to-day the face of a person whom he shall see to-morrow for
the first time.

        I will not now go behind the general statement to explore the
reason of this correspondency.  Let it suffice that in the light of
these two facts, namely, that the mind is One, and that nature is its
correlative, history is to be read and written.

        Thus in all ways does the soul concentrate and reproduce its
treasures for each pupil.  He, too, shall pass through the whole
cycle of experience.  He shall collect into a focus the rays of
nature.  History no longer shall be a dull book.  It shall walk
incarnate in every just and wise man.  You shall not tell me by
languages and titles a catalogue of the volumes you have read.  You
shall make me feel what periods you have lived.  A man shall be the
Temple of Fame.  He shall walk, as the poets have described that
goddess, in a robe painted all over with wonderful events and
experiences; -- his own form and features by their exalted
intelligence shall be that variegated vest.  I shall find in him the
Foreworld; in his childhood the Age of Gold; the Apples of Knowledge;
the Argonautic Expedition; the calling of Abraham; the building of
the Temple; the Advent of Christ; Dark Ages; the Revival of Letters;
the Reformation; the discovery of new lands; the opening of new
sciences, and new regions in man.  He shall be the priest of Pan, and
bring with him into humble cottages the blessing of the morning stars
and all the recorded benefits of heaven and earth.

        Is there somewhat overweening in this claim?  Then I reject all
I have written, for what is the use of pretending to know what we
know not?  But it is the fault of our rhetoric that we cannot
strongly state one fact without seeming to belie some other.  I hold
our actual knowledge very cheap.  Hear the rats in the wall, see the
lizard on the fence, the fungus under foot, the lichen on the log.
What do I know sympathetically, morally, of either of these worlds of
life?  As old as the Caucasian man, -- perhaps older, -- these
creatures have kept their counsel beside him, and there is no record
of any word or sign that has passed from one to the other.  What
connection do the books show between the fifty or sixty chemical
elements, and the historical eras?  Nay, what does history yet record
of the metaphysical annals of man?  What light does it shed on those
mysteries which we hide under the names Death and Immortality?  Yet
every history should be written in a wisdom which divined the range
of our affinities and looked at facts as symbols.  I am ashamed to
see what a shallow village tale our so-called History is.  How many
times we must say Rome, and Paris, and Constantinople!  What does
Rome know of rat and lizard?  What are Olympiads and Consulates to
these neighbouring systems of being?  Nay, what food or experience or
succour have they for the Esquimaux seal-hunter, for the Kanaka in
his canoe, for the fisherman, the stevedore, the porter?

        Broader and deeper we must write our annals, -- from an ethical
reformation, from an influx of the ever new, ever sanative
conscience, -- if we would trulier express our central and
wide-related nature, instead of this old chronology of selfishness
and pride to which we have too long lent our eyes.  Already that day
exists for us, shines in on us at unawares, but the path of science
and of letters is not the way into nature.  The idiot, the Indian,
the child, and unschooled farmer's boy, stand nearer to the light by
which nature is to be read, than the dissector or the antiquary.

 
 
        SELF-RELIANCE
 
        "Ne te quaesiveris extra."
 
 
        "Man is his own star; and the soul that can
        Render an honest and a perfect man,
        Commands all light, all influence, all fate;
        Nothing to him falls early or too late.
        Our acts our angels are, or good or ill,
        Our fatal shadows that walk by us still."
        _Epilogue to Beaumont and Fletcher's_
        _Honest Man's Fortune_

 
        Cast the bantling on the rocks,
        Suckle him with the she-wolf's teat;
        Wintered with the hawk and fox,
        Power and speed be hands and feet.

 
 
        ESSAY II _Self-Reliance_
 
        I read the other day some verses written by an eminent painter
which were original and not conventional.  The soul always hears an
admonition in such lines, let the subject be what it may.  The
sentiment they instil is of more value than any thought they may
contain.  To believe your own thought, to believe that what is true
for you in your private heart is true for all men, -- that is genius.
Speak your latent conviction, and it shall be the universal sense;
for the inmost in due time becomes the outmost,---- and our first
thought is rendered back to us by the trumpets of the Last Judgment.
Familiar as the voice of the mind is to each, the highest merit we
ascribe to Moses, Plato, and Milton is, that they set at naught books
and traditions, and spoke not what men but what they thought.  A man
should learn to detect and watch that gleam of light which flashes
across his mind from within, more than the lustre of the firmament of
bards and sages.  Yet he dismisses without notice his thought,
because it is his.  In every work of genius we recognize our own
rejected thoughts: they come back to us with a certain alienated
majesty.  Great works of art have no more affecting lesson for us
than this.  They teach us to abide by our spontaneous impression with
good-humored inflexibility then most when the whole cry of voices is
on the other side.  Else, to-morrow a stranger will say with masterly
good sense precisely what we have thought and felt all the time, and
we shall be forced to take with shame our own opinion from another.

        There is a time in every man's education when he arrives at the
conviction that envy is ignorance; that imitation is suicide; that he
must take himself for better, for worse, as his portion; that though
the wide universe is full of good, no kernel of nourishing corn can
come to him but through his toil bestowed on that plot of ground
which is given to him to till.  The power which resides in him is new
in nature, and none but he knows what that is which he can do, nor
does he know until he has tried.  Not for nothing one face, one
character, one fact, makes much impression on him, and another none.
This sculpture in the memory is not without preestablished harmony.
The eye was placed where one ray should fall, that it might testify
of that particular ray.  We but half express ourselves, and are
ashamed of that divine idea which each of us represents.  It may be
safely trusted as proportionate and of good issues, so it be
faithfully imparted, but God will not have his work made manifest by
cowards.  A man is relieved and gay when he has put his heart into
his work and done his best; but what he has said or done otherwise,
shall give him no peace.  It is a deliverance which does not deliver.
In the attempt his genius deserts him; no muse befriends; no
invention, no hope.

        Trust thyself: every heart vibrates to that iron string.
Accept the place the divine providence has found for you, the society
of your contemporaries, the connection of events.  Great men have
always done so, and confided themselves childlike to the genius of
their age, betraying their perception that the absolutely trustworthy
was seated at their heart, working through their hands, predominating
in all their being.  And we are now men, and must accept in the
highest mind the same transcendent destiny; and not minors and
invalids in a protected corner, not cowards fleeing before a
revolution, but guides, redeemers, and benefactors, obeying the
Almighty effort, and advancing on Chaos and the Dark.

        What pretty oracles nature yields us on this text, in the face
and behaviour of children, babes, and even brutes!  That divided and
rebel mind, that distrust of a sentiment because our arithmetic has
computed the strength and means opposed to our purpose, these have
not.  Their mind being whole, their eye is as yet unconquered, and
when we look in their faces, we are disconcerted.  Infancy conforms
to nobody: all conform to it, so that one babe commonly makes four or
five out of the adults who prattle and play to it.  So God has armed
youth and puberty and manhood no less with its own piquancy and
charm, and made it enviable and gracious and its claims not to be put
by, if it will stand by itself.  Do not think the youth has no force,
because he cannot speak to you and me.  Hark! in the next room his
voice is sufficiently clear and emphatic.  It seems he knows how to
speak to his contemporaries.  Bashful or bold, then, he will know how
to make us seniors very unnecessary.

        The nonchalance of boys who are sure of a dinner, and would
disdain as much as a lord to do or say aught to conciliate one, is
the healthy attitude of human nature.  A boy is in the parlour what
the pit is in the playhouse; independent, irresponsible, looking out
from his corner on such people and facts as pass by, he tries and
sentences them on their merits, in the swift, summary way of boys, as
good, bad, interesting, silly, eloquent, troublesome.  He cumbers
himself never about consequences, about interests: he gives an
independent, genuine verdict.  You must court him: he does not court
you.  But the man is, as it were, clapped into jail by his
consciousness.  As soon as he has once acted or spoken with eclat, he
is a committed person, watched by the sympathy or the hatred of
hundreds, whose affections must now enter into his account.  There is
no Lethe for this.  Ah, that he could pass again into his neutrality!
Who can thus avoid all pledges, and having observed, observe again
from the same unaffected, unbiased, unbribable, unaffrighted
innocence, must always be formidable.  He would utter opinions on all
passing affairs, which being seen to be not private, but necessary,
would sink like darts into the ear of men, and put them in fear.

        These are the voices which we hear in solitude, but they grow
faint and inaudible as we enter into the world.  Society everywhere
is in conspiracy against the manhood of every one of its members.
Society is a joint-stock company, in which the members agree, for the
better securing of his bread to each shareholder, to surrender the
liberty and culture of the eater.  The virtue in most request is
conformity.  Self-reliance is its aversion.  It loves not realities
and creators, but names and customs.

        Whoso would be a man must be a nonconformist.  He who would
gather immortal palms must not be hindered by the name of goodness,
but must explore if it be goodness.  Nothing is at last sacred but
the integrity of your own mind.  Absolve you to yourself, and you
shall have the suffrage of the world.  I remember an answer which
when quite young I was prompted to make to a valued adviser, who was
wont to importune me with the dear old doctrines of the church.  On
my saying, What have I to do with the sacredness of traditions, if I
live wholly from within? my friend suggested, -- "But these impulses
may be from below, not from above." I replied, "They do not seem to
me to be such; but if I am the Devil's child, I will live then from
the Devil." No law can be sacred to me but that of my nature.  Good
and bad are but names very readily transferable to that or this; the
only right is what is after my constitution, the only wrong what is
against it.  A man is to carry himself in the presence of all
opposition, as if every thing were titular and ephemeral but he.  I
am ashamed to think how easily we capitulate to badges and names, to
large societies and dead institutions.  Every decent and well-spoken
individual affects and sways me more than is right.  I ought to go
upright and vital, and speak the rude truth in all ways.  If malice
and vanity wear the coat of philanthropy, shall that pass?  If an
angry bigot assumes this bountiful cause of Abolition, and comes to
me with his last news from Barbadoes, why should I not say to him,
`Go love thy infant; love thy wood-chopper: be good-natured and
modest: have that grace; and never varnish your hard, uncharitable
ambition with this incredible tenderness for black folk a thousand
miles off.  Thy love afar is spite at home.' Rough and graceless
would be such greeting, but truth is handsomer than the affectation
of love.  Your goodness must have some edge to it, -- else it is
none.  The doctrine of hatred must be preached as the counteraction
of the doctrine of love when that pules and whines.  I shun father
and mother and wife and brother, when my genius calls me.  I would
write on the lintels of the door-post, _Whim_.  I hope it is somewhat
better than whim at last, but we cannot spend the day in explanation.
Expect me not to show cause why I seek or why I exclude company.
Then, again, do not tell me, as a good man did to-day, of my
obligation to put all poor men in good situations.  Are they _my_
poor?  I tell thee, thou foolish philanthropist, that I grudge the
dollar, the dime, the cent, I give to such men as do not belong to me
and to whom I do not belong.  There is a class of persons to whom by
all spiritual affinity I am bought and sold; for them I will go to
prison, if need be; but your miscellaneous popular charities; the
education at college of fools; the building of meeting-houses to the
vain end to which many now stand; alms to sots; and the thousandfold
Relief Societies; -- though I confess with shame I sometimes succumb
and give the dollar, it is a wicked dollar which by and by I shall
have the manhood to withhold.

        Virtues are, in the popular estimate, rather the exception than
the rule.  There is the man _and_ his virtues.  Men do what is called
a good action, as some piece of courage or charity, much as they
would pay a fine in expiation of daily non-appearance on parade.
Their works are done as an apology or extenuation of their living in
the world, -- as invalids and the insane pay a high board.  Their
virtues are penances.  I do not wish to expiate, but to live.  My
life is for itself and not for a spectacle.  I much prefer that it
should be of a lower strain, so it be genuine and equal, than that it
should be glittering and unsteady.  I wish it to be sound and sweet,
and not to need diet and bleeding.  I ask primary evidence that you
are a man, and refuse this appeal from the man to his actions.  I
know that for myself it makes no difference whether I do or forbear
those actions which are reckoned excellent.  I cannot consent to pay
for a privilege where I have intrinsic right.  Few and mean as my
gifts may be, I actually am, and do not need for my own assurance or
the assurance of my fellows any secondary testimony.

        What I must do is all that concerns me, not what the people
think.  This rule, equally arduous in actual and in intellectual
life, may serve for the whole distinction between greatness and
meanness.  It is the harder, because you will always find those who
think they know what is your duty better than you know it.  It is
easy in the world to live after the world's opinion; it is easy in
solitude to live after our own; but the great man is he who in the
midst of the crowd keeps with perfect sweetness the independence of
solitude.

        The objection to conforming to usages that have become dead to
you is, that it scatters your force.  It loses your time and blurs
the impression of your character.  If you maintain a dead church,
contribute to a dead Bible-society, vote with a great party either
for the government or against it, spread your table like base
housekeepers, -- under all these screens I have difficulty to detect
the precise man you are.  And, of course, so much force is withdrawn
from your proper life.  But do your work, and I shall know you.  Do
your work, and you shall reinforce yourself.  A man must consider
what a blindman's-buff is this game of conformity.  If I know your
sect, I anticipate your argument.  I hear a preacher announce for his
text and topic the expediency of one of the institutions of his
church.  Do I not know beforehand that not possibly can he say a new
and spontaneous word?  Do I not know that, with all this ostentation
of examining the grounds of the institution, he will do no such
thing?  Do I not know that he is pledged to himself not to look but
at one side, -- the permitted side, not as a man, but as a parish
minister?  He is a retained attorney, and these airs of the bench are
the emptiest affectation.  Well, most men have bound their eyes with
one or another handkerchief, and attached themselves to some one of
these communities of opinion.  This conformity makes them not false
in a few particulars, authors of a few lies, but false in all
particulars.  Their every truth is not quite true.  Their two is not
the real two, their four not the real four; so that every word they
say chagrins us, and we know not where to begin to set them right.
Meantime nature is not slow to equip us in the prison-uniform of the
party to which we adhere.  We come to wear one cut of face and
figure, and acquire by degrees the gentlest asinine expression.
There is a mortifying experience in particular, which does not fail
to wreak itself also in the general history; I mean "the foolish face
of praise," the forced smile which we put on in company where we do
not feel at ease in answer to conversation which does not interest
us.  The muscles, not spontaneously moved, but moved by a low
usurping wilfulness, grow tight about the outline of the face with
the most disagreeable sensation.

        For nonconformity the world whips you with its displeasure.
And therefore a man must know how to estimate a sour face.  The
by-standers look askance on him in the public street or in the
friend's parlour.  If this aversation had its origin in contempt and
resistance like his own, he might well go home with a sad
countenance; but the sour faces of the multitude, like their sweet
faces, have no deep cause, but are put on and off as the wind blows
and a newspaper directs.  Yet is the discontent of the multitude more
formidable than that of the senate and the college.  It is easy
enough for a firm man who knows the world to brook the rage of the
cultivated classes.  Their rage is decorous and prudent, for they are
timid as being very vulnerable themselves.  But when to their
feminine rage the indignation of the people is added, when the
ignorant and the poor are aroused, when the unintelligent brute force
that lies at the bottom of society is made to growl and mow, it needs
the habit of magnanimity and religion to treat it godlike as a trifle
of no concernment.

        The other terror that scares us from self-trust is our
consistency; a reverence for our past act or word, because the eyes
of others have no other data for computing our orbit than our past
acts, and we are loath to disappoint them.

        But why should you keep your head over your shoulder?  Why drag
about this corpse of your memory, lest you contradict somewhat you
have stated in this or that public place?  Suppose you should
contradict yourself; what then?  It seems to be a rule of wisdom
never to rely on your memory alone, scarcely even in acts of pure
memory, but to bring the past for judgment into the thousand-eyed
present, and live ever in a new day.  In your metaphysics you have
denied personality to the Deity: yet when the devout motions of the
soul come, yield to them heart and life, though they should clothe
God with shape and color.  Leave your theory, as Joseph his coat in
the hand of the harlot, and flee.

        A foolish consistency is the hobgoblin of little minds, adored
by little statesmen and philosophers and divines.  With consistency a
great soul has simply nothing to do.  He may as well concern himself
with his shadow on the wall.  Speak what you think now in hard words,
and to-morrow speak what to-morrow thinks in hard words again, though
it contradict every thing you said to-day.  -- `Ah, so you shall be
sure to be misunderstood.' -- Is it so bad, then, to be
misunderstood?  Pythagoras was misunderstood, and Socrates, and
Jesus, and Luther, and Copernicus, and Galileo, and Newton, and every
pure and wise spirit that ever took flesh.  To be great is to be
misunderstood.

        I suppose no man can violate his nature.  All the sallies of
his will are rounded in by the law of his being, as the inequalities
of Andes and Himmaleh are insignificant in the curve of the sphere.
Nor does it matter how you gauge and try him.  A character is like an
acrostic or Alexandrian stanza; -- read it forward, backward, or
across, it still spells the same thing.  In this pleasing, contrite
wood-life which God allows me, let me record day by day my honest
thought without prospect or retrospect, and, I cannot doubt, it will
be found symmetrical, though I mean it not, and see it not.  My book
should smell of pines and resound with the hum of insects.  The
swallow over my window should interweave that thread or straw he
carries in his bill into my web also.  We pass for what we are.
Character teaches above our wills.  Men imagine that they communicate
their virtue or vice only by overt actions, and do not see that
virtue or vice emit a breath every moment.

        There will be an agreement in whatever variety of actions, so
they be each honest and natural in their hour.  For of one will, the
actions will be harmonious, however unlike they seem.  These
varieties are lost sight of at a little distance, at a little height
of thought.  One tendency unites them all.  The voyage of the best
ship is a zigzag line of a hundred tacks.  See the line from a
sufficient distance, and it straightens itself to the average
tendency.  Your genuine action will explain itself, and will explain
your other genuine actions.  Your conformity explains nothing.  Act
singly, and what you have already done singly will justify you now.
Greatness appeals to the future.  If I can be firm enough to-day to
do right, and scorn eyes, I must have done so much right before as to
defend me now.  Be it how it will, do right now.  Always scorn
appearances, and you always may.  The force of character is
cumulative.  All the foregone days of virtue work their health into
this.  What makes the majesty of the heroes of the senate and the
field, which so fills the imagination?  The consciousness of a train
of great days and victories behind.  They shed an united light on the
advancing actor.  He is attended as by a visible escort of angels.
That is it which throws thunder into Chatham's voice, and dignity
into Washington's port, and America into Adams's eye.  Honor is
venerable to us because it is no ephemeris.  It is always ancient
virtue.  We worship it to-day because it is not of to-day.  We love
it and pay it homage, because it is not a trap for our love and
homage, but is self-dependent, self-derived, and therefore of an old
immaculate pedigree, even if shown in a young person.

 
        I hope in these days we have heard the last of conformity and
consistency.  Let the words be gazetted and ridiculous henceforward.
Instead of the gong for dinner, let us hear a whistle from the
Spartan fife.  Let us never bow and apologize more.  A great man is
coming to eat at my house.  I do not wish to please him; I wish that
he should wish to please me.  I will stand here for humanity, and
though I would make it kind, I would make it true.  Let us affront
and reprimand the smooth mediocrity and squalid contentment of the
times, and hurl in the face of custom, and trade, and office, the
fact which is the upshot of all history, that there is a great
responsible Thinker and Actor working wherever a man works; that a
true man belongs to no other time or place, but is the centre of
things.  Where he is, there is nature.  He measures you, and all men,
and all events.  Ordinarily, every body in society reminds us of
somewhat else, or of some other person.  Character, reality, reminds
you of nothing else; it takes place of the whole creation.  The man
must be so much, that he must make all circumstances indifferent.
Every true man is a cause, a country, and an age; requires infinite
spaces and numbers and time fully to accomplish his design; -- and
posterity seem to follow his steps as a train of clients.  A man
Caesar is born, and for ages after we have a Roman Empire.  Christ is
born, and millions of minds so grow and cleave to his genius, that he
is confounded with virtue and the possible of man.  An institution is
the lengthened shadow of one man; as, Monachism, of the Hermit
Antony; the Reformation, of Luther; Quakerism, of Fox; Methodism, of
Wesley; Abolition, of Clarkson.  Scipio, Milton called "the height of
Rome"; and all history resolves itself very easily into the biography
of a few stout and earnest persons.

        Let a man then know his worth, and keep things under his feet.
Let him not peep or steal, or skulk up and down with the air of a
charity-boy, a bastard, or an interloper, in the world which exists
for him.  But the man in the street, finding no worth in himself
which corresponds to the force which built a tower or sculptured a
marble god, feels poor when he looks on these.  To him a palace, a
statue, or a costly book have an alien and forbidding air, much like
a gay equipage, and seem to say like that, `Who are you, Sir?' Yet
they all are his, suitors for his notice, petitioners to his
faculties that they will come out and take possession.  The picture
waits for my verdict: it is not to command me, but I am to settle its
claims to praise.  That popular fable of the sot who was picked up
dead drunk in the street, carried to the duke's house, washed and
dressed and laid in the duke's bed, and, on his waking, treated with
all obsequious ceremony like the duke, and assured that he had been
insane, owes its popularity to the fact, that it symbolizes so well
the state of man, who is in the world a sort of sot, but now and then
wakes up, exercises his reason, and finds himself a true prince.

        Our reading is mendicant and sycophantic.  In history, our
imagination plays us false.  Kingdom and lordship, power and estate,
are a gaudier vocabulary than private John and Edward in a small
house and common day's work; but the things of life are the same to
both; the sum total of both is the same.  Why all this deference to
Alfred, and Scanderbeg, and Gustavus?  Suppose they were virtuous;
did they wear out virtue?  As great a stake depends on your private
act to-day, as followed their public and renowned steps.  When
private men shall act with original views, the lustre will be
transferred from the actions of kings to those of gentlemen.

        The world has been instructed by its kings, who have so
magnetized the eyes of nations.  It has been taught by this colossal
symbol the mutual reverence that is due from man to man.  The joyful
loyalty with which men have everywhere suffered the king, the noble,
or the great proprietor to walk among them by a law of his own, make
his own scale of men and things, and reverse theirs, pay for benefits
not with money but with honor, and represent the law in his person,
was the hieroglyphic by which they obscurely signified their
consciousness of their own right and comeliness, the right of every
man.

        The magnetism which all original action exerts is explained
when we inquire the reason of self-trust.  Who is the Trustee?  What
is the aboriginal Self, on which a universal reliance may be
grounded?  What is the nature and power of that science-baffling
star, without parallax, without calculable elements, which shoots a
ray of beauty even into trivial and impure actions, if the least mark
of independence appear?  The inquiry leads us to that source, at once
the essence of genius, of virtue, and of life, which we call
Spontaneity or Instinct.  We denote this primary wisdom as Intuition,
whilst all later teachings are tuitions.  In that deep force, the
last fact behind which analysis cannot go, all things find their
common origin.  For, the sense of being which in calm hours rises, we
know not how, in the soul, is not diverse from things, from space,
from light, from time, from man, but one with them, and proceeds
obviously from the same source whence their life and being also
proceed.  We first share the life by which things exist, and
afterwards see them as appearances in nature, and forget that we have
shared their cause.  Here is the fountain of action and of thought.
Here are the lungs of that inspiration which giveth man wisdom, and
which cannot be denied without impiety and atheism.  We lie in the
lap of immense intelligence, which makes us receivers of its truth
and organs of its activity.  When we discern justice, when we discern
truth, we do nothing of ourselves, but allow a passage to its beams.
If we ask whence this comes, if we seek to pry into the soul that
causes, all philosophy is at fault.  Its presence or its absence is
all we can affirm.  Every man discriminates between the voluntary
acts of his mind, and his involuntary perceptions, and knows that to
his involuntary perceptions a perfect faith is due.  He may err in
the expression of them, but he knows that these things are so, like
day and night, not to be disputed.  My wilful actions and
acquisitions are but roving; -- the idlest reverie, the faintest
native emotion, command my curiosity and respect.  Thoughtless people
contradict as readily the statement of perceptions as of opinions, or
rather much more readily; for, they do not distinguish between
perception and notion.  They fancy that I choose to see this or that
thing.  But perception is not whimsical, but fatal.  If I see a
trait, my children will see it after me, and in course of time, all
mankind, -- although it may chance that no one has seen it before me.
For my perception of it is as much a fact as the sun.

        The relations of the soul to the divine spirit are so pure,
that it is profane to seek to interpose helps.  It must be that when
God speaketh he should communicate, not one thing, but all things;
should fill the world with his voice; should scatter forth light,
nature, time, souls, from the centre of the present thought; and new
date and new create the whole.  Whenever a mind is simple, and
receives a divine wisdom, old things pass away, -- means, teachers,
texts, temples fall; it lives now, and absorbs past and future into
the present hour.  All things are made sacred by relation to it, --
one as much as another.  All things are dissolved to their centre by
their cause, and, in the universal miracle, petty and particular
miracles disappear.  If, therefore, a man claims to know and speak of
God, and carries you backward to the phraseology of some old
mouldered nation in another country, in another world, believe him
not.  Is the acorn better than the oak which is its fulness and
completion?  Is the parent better than the child into whom he has
cast his ripened being?  Whence, then, this worship of the past?  The
centuries are conspirators against the sanity and authority of the
soul.  Time and space are but physiological colors which the eye
makes, but the soul is light; where it is, is day; where it was, is
night; and history is an impertinence and an injury, if it be any
thing more than a cheerful apologue or parable of my being and
becoming.

        Man is timid and apologetic; he is no longer upright; he dares
not say `I think,' `I am,' but quotes some saint or sage.  He is
ashamed before the blade of grass or the blowing rose.  These roses
under my window make no reference to former roses or to better ones;
they are for what they are; they exist with God to-day.  There is no
time to them.  There is simply the rose; it is perfect in every
moment of its existence.  Before a leaf-bud has burst, its whole life
acts; in the full-blown flower there is no more; in the leafless root
there is no less.  Its nature is satisfied, and it satisfies nature,
in all moments alike.  But man postpones or remembers; he does not
live in the present, but with reverted eye laments the past, or,
heedless of the riches that surround him, stands on tiptoe to foresee
the future.  He cannot be happy and strong until he too lives with
nature in the present, above time.

        This should be plain enough.  Yet see what strong intellects
dare not yet hear God himself, unless he speak the phraseology of I
know not what David, or Jeremiah, or Paul.  We shall not always set
so great a price on a few texts, on a few lives.  We are like
children who repeat by rote the sentences of grandames and tutors,
and, as they grow older, of the men of talents and character they
chance to see, -- painfully recollecting the exact words they spoke;
afterwards, when they come into the point of view which those had who
uttered these sayings, they understand them, and are willing to let
the words go; for, at any time, they can use words as good when
occasion comes.  If we live truly, we shall see truly.  It is as easy
for the strong man to be strong, as it is for the weak to be weak.
When we have new perception, we shall gladly disburden the memory of
its hoarded treasures as old rubbish.  When a man lives with God, his
voice shall be as sweet as the murmur of the brook and the rustle of
the corn.

        And now at last the highest truth on this subject remains
unsaid; probably cannot be said; for all that we say is the far-off
remembering of the intuition.  That thought, by what I can now
nearest approach to say it, is this.  When good is near you, when you
have life in yourself, it is not by any known or accustomed way; you
shall not discern the foot-prints of any other; you shall not see the
face of man; you shall not hear any name;---- the way, the thought,
the good, shall be wholly strange and new.  It shall exclude example
and experience.  You take the way from man, not to man.  All persons
that ever existed are its forgotten ministers.  Fear and hope are
alike beneath it.  There is somewhat low even in hope.  In the hour
of vision, there is nothing that can be called gratitude, nor
properly joy.  The soul raised over passion beholds identity and
eternal causation, perceives the self-existence of Truth and Right,
and calms itself with knowing that all things go well.  Vast spaces
of nature, the Atlantic Ocean, the South Sea, -- long intervals of
time, years, centuries, -- are of no account.  This which I think and
feel underlay every former state of life and circumstances, as it
does underlie my present, and what is called life, and what is called
death.

        Life only avails, not the having lived.  Power ceases in the
instant of repose; it resides in the moment of transition from a past
to a new state, in the shooting of the gulf, in the darting to an
aim.  This one fact the world hates, that the soul _becomes_; for
that for ever degrades the past, turns all riches to poverty, all
reputation to a shame, confounds the saint with the rogue, shoves
Jesus and Judas equally aside.  Why, then, do we prate of
self-reliance?  Inasmuch as the soul is present, there will be power
not confident but agent.  To talk of reliance is a poor external way
of speaking.  Speak rather of that which relies, because it works and
is.  Who has more obedience than I masters me, though he should not
raise his finger.  Round him I must revolve by the gravitation of
spirits.  We fancy it rhetoric, when we speak of eminent virtue.  We
do not yet see that virtue is Height, and that a man or a company of
men, plastic and permeable to principles, by the law of nature must
overpower and ride all cities, nations, kings, rich men, poets, who
are not.

        This is the ultimate fact which we so quickly reach on this, as
on every topic, the resolution of all into the ever-blessed ONE.
Self-existence is the attribute of the Supreme Cause, and it
constitutes the measure of good by the degree in which it enters into
all lower forms.  All things real are so by so much virtue as they
contain.  Commerce, husbandry, hunting, whaling, war, eloquence,
personal weight, are somewhat, and engage my respect as examples of
its presence and impure action.  I see the same law working in nature
for conservation and growth.  Power is in nature the essential
measure of right.  Nature suffers nothing to remain in her kingdoms
which cannot help itself.  The genesis and maturation of a planet,
its poise and orbit, the bended tree recovering itself from the
strong wind, the vital resources of every animal and vegetable, are
demonstrations of the self-sufficing, and therefore self-relying
soul.

        Thus all concentrates: let us not rove; let us sit at home with
the cause.  Let us stun and astonish the intruding rabble of men and
books and institutions, by a simple declaration of the divine fact.
Bid the invaders take the shoes from off their feet, for God is here
within.  Let our simplicity judge them, and our docility to our own
law demonstrate the poverty of nature and fortune beside our native
riches.

        But now we are a mob.  Man does not stand in awe of man, nor is
his genius admonished to stay at home, to put itself in communication
with the internal ocean, but it goes abroad to beg a cup of water of
the urns of other men.  We must go alone.  I like the silent church
before the service begins, better than any preaching.  How far off,
how cool, how chaste the persons look, begirt each one with a
precinct or sanctuary!  So let us always sit.  Why should we assume
the faults of our friend, or wife, or father, or child, because they
sit around our hearth, or are said to have the same blood?  All men
have my blood, and I have all men's.  Not for that will I adopt their
petulance or folly, even to the extent of being ashamed of it.  But
your isolation must not be mechanical, but spiritual, that is, must
be elevation.  At times the whole world seems to be in conspiracy to
importune you with emphatic trifles.  Friend, client, child,
sickness, fear, want, charity, all knock at once at thy closet door,
and say, -- `Come out unto us.' But keep thy state; come not into
their confusion.  The power men possess to annoy me, I give them by a
weak curiosity.  No man can come near me but through my act.  "What
we love that we have, but by desire we bereave ourselves of the
love."

        If we cannot at once rise to the sanctities of obedience and
faith, let us at least resist our temptations; let us enter into the
state of war, and wake Thor and Woden, courage and constancy, in our
Saxon breasts.  This is to be done in our smooth times by speaking
the truth.  Check this lying hospitality and lying affection.  Live
no longer to the expectation of these deceived and deceiving people
with whom we converse.  Say to them, O father, O mother, O wife, O
brother, O friend, I have lived with you after appearances hitherto.
Henceforward I am the truth's.  Be it known unto you that
henceforward I obey no law less than the eternal law.  I will have no
covenants but proximities.  I shall endeavour to nourish my parents,
to support my family, to be the chaste husband of one wife, -- but
these relations I must fill after a new and unprecedented way.  I
appeal from your customs.  I must be myself.  I cannot break myself
any longer for you, or you.  If you can love me for what I am, we
shall be the happier.  If you cannot, I will still seek to deserve
that you should.  I will not hide my tastes or aversions.  I will so
trust that what is deep is holy, that I will do strongly before the
sun and moon whatever inly rejoices me, and the heart appoints.  If
you are noble, I will love you; if you are not, I will not hurt you
and myself by hypocritical attentions.  If you are true, but not in
the same truth with me, cleave to your companions; I will seek my
own.  I do this not selfishly, but humbly and truly.  It is alike
your interest, and mine, and all men's, however long we have dwelt in
lies, to live in truth.  Does this sound harsh to-day?  You will soon
love what is dictated by your nature as well as mine, and, if we
follow the truth, it will bring us out safe at last.  -- But so you
may give these friends pain.  Yes, but I cannot sell my liberty and
my power, to save their sensibility.  Besides, all persons have their
moments of reason, when they look out into the region of absolute
truth; then will they justify me, and do the same thing.

        The populace think that your rejection of popular standards is
a rejection of all standard, and mere antinomianism; and the bold
sensualist will use the name of philosophy to gild his crimes.  But
the law of consciousness abides.  There are two confessionals, in one
or the other of which we must be shriven.  You may fulfil your round
of duties by clearing yourself in the _direct_, or in the _reflex_
way.  Consider whether you have satisfied your relations to father,
mother, cousin, neighbour, town, cat, and dog; whether any of these
can upbraid you.  But I may also neglect this reflex standard, and
absolve me to myself.  I have my own stern claims and perfect circle.
It denies the name of duty to many offices that are called duties.
But if I can discharge its debts, it enables me to dispense with the
popular code.  If any one imagines that this law is lax, let him keep
its commandment one day.

        And truly it demands something godlike in him who has cast off
the common motives of humanity, and has ventured to trust himself for
a taskmaster.  High be his heart, faithful his will, clear his sight,
that he may in good earnest be doctrine, society, law, to himself,
that a simple purpose may be to him as strong as iron necessity is to
others!

        If any man consider the present aspects of what is called by
distinction _society_, he will see the need of these ethics.  The
sinew and heart of man seem to be drawn out, and we are become
timorous, desponding whimperers.  We are afraid of truth, afraid of
fortune, afraid of death, and afraid of each other.  Our age yields
no great and perfect persons.  We want men and women who shall
renovate life and our social state, but we see that most natures are
insolvent, cannot satisfy their own wants, have an ambition out of
all proportion to their practical force, and do lean and beg day and
night continually.  Our housekeeping is mendicant, our arts, our
occupations, our marriages, our religion, we have not chosen, but
society has chosen for us.  We are parlour soldiers.  We shun the
rugged battle of fate, where strength is born.

        If our young men miscarry in their first enterprises, they lose
all heart.  If the young merchant fails, men say he is _ruined_.  If
the finest genius studies at one of our colleges, and is not
installed in an office within one year afterwards in the cities or
suburbs of Boston or New York, it seems to his friends and to himself
that he is right in being disheartened, and in complaining the rest
of his life.  A sturdy lad from New Hampshire or Vermont, who in turn
tries all the professions, who _teams it_, _farms it_, _peddles_,
keeps a school, preaches, edits a newspaper, goes to Congress, buys a
township, and so forth, in successive years, and always, like a cat,
falls on his feet, is worth a hundred of these city dolls.  He walks
abreast with his days, and feels no shame in not `studying a
profession,' for he does not postpone his life, but lives already.
He has not one chance, but a hundred chances.  Let a Stoic open the
resources of man, and tell men they are not leaning willows, but can
and must detach themselves; that with the exercise of self-trust, new
powers shall appear; that a man is the word made flesh, born to shed
healing to the nations, that he should be ashamed of our compassion,
and that the moment he acts from himself, tossing the laws, the
books, idolatries, and customs out of the window, we pity him no
more, but thank and revere him, -- and that teacher shall restore the
life of man to splendor, and make his name dear to all history.

        It is easy to see that a greater self-reliance must work a
revolution in all the offices and relations of men; in their
religion; in their education; in their pursuits; their modes of
living; their association; in their property; in their speculative
views.

        1. In what prayers do men allow themselves!  That which they
call a holy office is not so much as brave and manly.  Prayer looks
abroad and asks for some foreign addition to come through some
foreign virtue, and loses itself in endless mazes of natural and
supernatural, and mediatorial and miraculous.  Prayer that craves a
particular commodity, -- any thing less than all good, -- is vicious.
Prayer is the contemplation of the facts of life from the highest
point of view.  It is the soliloquy of a beholding and jubilant soul.
It is the spirit of God pronouncing his works good.  But prayer as a
means to effect a private end is meanness and theft.  It supposes
dualism and not unity in nature and consciousness.  As soon as the
man is at one with God, he will not beg.  He will then see prayer in
all action.  The prayer of the farmer kneeling in his field to weed
it, the prayer of the rower kneeling with the stroke of his oar, are
true prayers heard throughout nature, though for cheap ends.
Caratach, in Fletcher's Bonduca, when admonished to inquire the mind
of the god Audate, replies, --

                 "His hidden meaning lies in our endeavours;
                 Our valors are our best gods."

        Another sort of false prayers are our regrets.  Discontent is
the want of self-reliance: it is infirmity of will.  Regret
calamities, if you can thereby help the sufferer; if not, attend your
own work, and already the evil begins to be repaired.  Our sympathy
is just as base.  We come to them who weep foolishly, and sit down
and cry for company, instead of imparting to them truth and health in
rough electric shocks, putting them once more in communication with
their own reason.  The secret of fortune is joy in our hands.
Welcome evermore to gods and men is the self-helping man.  For him
all doors are flung wide: him all tongues greet, all honors crown,
all eyes follow with desire.  Our love goes out to him and embraces
him, because he did not need it.  We solicitously and apologetically
caress and celebrate him, because he held on his way and scorned our
disapprobation.  The gods love him because men hated him.  "To the
persevering mortal," said Zoroaster, "the blessed Immortals are
swift."

        As men's prayers are a disease of the will, so are their creeds
a disease of the intellect.  They say with those foolish Israelites,
`Let not God speak to us, lest we die.  Speak thou, speak any man
with us, and we will obey.' Everywhere I am hindered of meeting God
in my brother, because he has shut his own temple doors, and recites
fables merely of his brother's, or his brother's brother's God.
Every new mind is a new classification.  If it prove a mind of
uncommon activity and power, a Locke, a Lavoisier, a Hutton, a
Bentham, a Fourier, it imposes its classification on other men, and
lo! a new system.  In proportion to the depth of the thought, and so
to the number of the objects it touches and brings within reach of
the pupil, is his complacency.  But chiefly is this apparent in
creeds and churches, which are also classifications of some powerful
mind acting on the elemental thought of duty, and man's relation to
the Highest.  Such is Calvinism, Quakerism, Swedenborgism.  The pupil
takes the same delight in subordinating every thing to the new
terminology, as a girl who has just learned botany in seeing a new
earth and new seasons thereby.  It will happen for a time, that the
pupil will find his intellectual power has grown by the study of his
master's mind.  But in all unbalanced minds, the classification is
idolized, passes for the end, and not for a speedily exhaustible
means, so that the walls of the system blend to their eye in the
remote horizon with the walls of the universe; the luminaries of
heaven seem to them hung on the arch their master built.  They cannot
imagine how you aliens have any right to see, -- how you can see; `It
must be somehow that you stole the light from us.' They do not yet
perceive, that light, unsystematic, indomitable, will break into any
cabin, even into theirs.  Let them chirp awhile and call it their
own.  If they are honest and do well, presently their neat new
pinfold will be too strait and low, will crack, will lean, will rot
and vanish, and the immortal light, all young and joyful,
million-orbed, million-colored, will beam over the universe as on the
first morning.

        2. It is for want of self-culture that the superstition of
Travelling, whose idols are Italy, England, Egypt, retains its
fascination for all educated Americans.  They who made England,
Italy, or Greece venerable in the imagination did so by sticking fast
where they were, like an axis of the earth.  In manly hours, we feel
that duty is our place.  The soul is no traveller; the wise man stays
at home, and when his necessities, his duties, on any occasion call
him from his house, or into foreign lands, he is at home still, and
shall make men sensible by the expression of his countenance, that he
goes the missionary of wisdom and virtue, and visits cities and men
like a sovereign, and not like an interloper or a valet.

        I have no churlish objection to the circumnavigation of the
globe, for the purposes of art, of study, and benevolence, so that
the man is first domesticated, or does not go abroad with the hope of
finding somewhat greater than he knows.  He who travels to be amused,
or to get somewhat which he does not carry, travels away from
himself, and grows old even in youth among old things.  In Thebes, in
Palmyra, his will and mind have become old and dilapidated as they.
He carries ruins to ruins.

        Travelling is a fool's paradise.  Our first journeys discover
to us the indifference of places.  At home I dream that at Naples, at
Rome, I can be intoxicated with beauty, and lose my sadness.  I pack
my trunk, embrace my friends, embark on the sea, and at last wake up
in Naples, and there beside me is the stern fact, the sad self,
unrelenting, identical, that I fled from.  I seek the Vatican, and
the palaces.  I affect to be intoxicated with sights and suggestions,
but I am not intoxicated.  My giant goes with me wherever I go.

        3. But the rage of travelling is a symptom of a deeper
unsoundness affecting the whole intellectual action.  The intellect
is vagabond, and our system of education fosters restlessness.  Our
minds travel when our bodies are forced to stay at home.  We imitate;
and what is imitation but the travelling of the mind?  Our houses are
built with foreign taste; our shelves are garnished with foreign
ornaments; our opinions, our tastes, our faculties, lean, and follow
the Past and the Distant.  The soul created the arts wherever they
have flourished.  It was in his own mind that the artist sought his
model.  It was an application of his own thought to the thing to be
done and the conditions to be observed.  And why need we copy the
Doric or the Gothic model?  Beauty, convenience, grandeur of thought,
and quaint expression are as near to us as to any, and if the
American artist will study with hope and love the precise thing to be
done by him, considering the climate, the soil, the length of the
day, the wants of the people, the habit and form of the government,
he will create a house in which all these will find themselves
fitted, and taste and sentiment will be satisfied also.

        Insist on yourself; never imitate.  Your own gift you can
present every moment with the cumulative force of a whole life's
cultivation; but of the adopted talent of another, you have only an
extemporaneous, half possession.  That which each can do best, none
but his Maker can teach him.  No man yet knows what it is, nor can,
till that person has exhibited it.  Where is the master who could
have taught Shakspeare?  Where is the master who could have
instructed Franklin, or Washington, or Bacon, or Newton?  Every great
man is a unique.  The Scipionism of Scipio is precisely that part he
could not borrow.  Shakspeare will never be made by the study of
Shakspeare.  Do that which is assigned you, and you cannot hope too
much or dare too much.  There is at this moment for you an utterance
brave and grand as that of the colossal chisel of Phidias, or trowel
of the Egyptians, or the pen of Moses, or Dante, but different from
all these.  Not possibly will the soul all rich, all eloquent, with
thousand-cloven tongue, deign to repeat itself; but if you can hear
what these patriarchs say, surely you can reply to them in the same
pitch of voice; for the ear and the tongue are two organs of one
nature.  Abide in the simple and noble regions of thy life, obey thy
heart, and thou shalt reproduce the Foreworld again.

        4. As our Religion, our Education, our Art look abroad, so does
our spirit of society.  All men plume themselves on the improvement
of society, and no man improves.

        Society never advances.  It recedes as fast on one side as it
gains on the other.  It undergoes continual changes; it is barbarous,
it is civilized, it is christianized, it is rich, it is scientific;
but this change is not amelioration.  For every thing that is given,
something is taken.  Society acquires new arts, and loses old
instincts.  What a contrast between the well-clad, reading, writing,
thinking American, with a watch, a pencil, and a bill of exchange in
his pocket, and the naked New Zealander, whose property is a club, a
spear, a mat, and an undivided twentieth of a shed to sleep under!
But compare the health of the two men, and you shall see that the
white man has lost his aboriginal strength.  If the traveller tell us
truly, strike the savage with a broad axe, and in a day or two the
flesh shall unite and heal as if you struck the blow into soft pitch,
and the same blow shall send the white to his grave.

        The civilized man has built a coach, but has lost the use of
his feet.  He is supported on crutches, but lacks so much support of
muscle.  He has a fine Geneva watch, but he fails of the skill to
tell the hour by the sun.  A Greenwich nautical almanac he has, and
so being sure of the information when he wants it, the man in the
street does not know a star in the sky.  The solstice he does not
observe; the equinox he knows as little; and the whole bright
calendar of the year is without a dial in his mind.  His note-books
impair his memory; his libraries overload his wit; the
insurance-office increases the number of accidents; and it may be a
question whether machinery does not encumber; whether we have not
lost by refinement some energy, by a Christianity entrenched in
establishments and forms, some vigor of wild virtue.  For every Stoic
was a Stoic; but in Christendom where is the Christian?

        There is no more deviation in the moral standard than in the
standard of height or bulk.  No greater men are now than ever were.
A singular equality may be observed between the great men of the
first and of the last ages; nor can all the science, art, religion,
and philosophy of the nineteenth century avail to educate greater men
than Plutarch's heroes, three or four and twenty centuries ago.  Not
in time is the race progressive.  Phocion, Socrates, Anaxagoras,
Diogenes, are great men, but they leave no class.  He who is really
of their class will not be called by their name, but will be his own
man, and, in his turn, the founder of a sect.  The arts and
inventions of each period are only its costume, and do not invigorate
men.  The harm of the improved machinery may compensate its good.
Hudson and Behring accomplished so much in their fishing-boats, as to
astonish Parry and Franklin, whose equipment exhausted the resources
of science and art.  Galileo, with an opera-glass, discovered a more
splendid series of celestial phenomena than any one since.  Columbus
found the New World in an undecked boat.  It is curious to see the
periodical disuse and perishing of means and machinery, which were
introduced with loud laudation a few years or centuries before.  The
great genius returns to essential man.  We reckoned the improvements
of the art of war among the triumphs of science, and yet Napoleon
conquered Europe by the bivouac, which consisted of falling back on
naked valor, and disencumbering it of all aids.  The Emperor held it
impossible to make a perfect army, says Las Casas, "without
abolishing our arms, magazines, commissaries, and carriages, until,
in imitation of the Roman custom, the soldier should receive his
supply of corn, grind it in his hand-mill, and bake his bread
himself."

        Society is a wave.  The wave moves onward, but the water of
which it is composed does not.  The same particle does not rise from
the valley to the ridge.  Its unity is only phenomenal.  The persons
who make up a nation to-day, next year die, and their experience with
them.

        And so the reliance on Property, including the reliance on
governments which protect it, is the want of self-reliance.  Men have
looked away from themselves and at things so long, that they have
come to esteem the religious, learned, and civil institutions as
guards of property, and they deprecate assaults on these, because
they feel them to be assaults on property.  They measure their esteem
of each other by what each has, and not by what each is.  But a
cultivated man becomes ashamed of his property, out of new respect
for his nature.  Especially he hates what he has, if he see that it
is accidental, -- came to him by inheritance, or gift, or crime; then
he feels that it is not having; it does not belong to him, has no
root in him, and merely lies there, because no revolution or no
robber takes it away.  But that which a man is does always by
necessity acquire, and what the man acquires is living property,
which does not wait the beck of rulers, or mobs, or revolutions, or
fire, or storm, or bankruptcies, but perpetually renews itself
wherever the man breathes.  "Thy lot or portion of life," said the
Caliph Ali, "is seeking after thee; therefore be at rest from seeking
after it." Our dependence on these foreign goods leads us to our
slavish respect for numbers.  The political parties meet in numerous
conventions; the greater the concourse, and with each new uproar of
announcement, The delegation from Essex!  The Democrats from New
Hampshire!  The Whigs of Maine! the young patriot feels himself
stronger than before by a new thousand of eyes and arms.  In like
manner the reformers summon conventions, and vote and resolve in
multitude.  Not so, O friends! will the God deign to enter and
inhabit you, but by a method precisely the reverse.  It is only as a
man puts off all foreign support, and stands alone, that I see him to
be strong and to prevail.  He is weaker by every recruit to his
banner.  Is not a man better than a town?  Ask nothing of men, and in
the endless mutation, thou only firm column must presently appear the
upholder of all that surrounds thee.  He who knows that power is
inborn, that he is weak because he has looked for good out of him and
elsewhere, and so perceiving, throws himself unhesitatingly on his
thought, instantly rights himself, stands in the erect position,
commands his limbs, works miracles; just as a man who stands on his
feet is stronger than a man who stands on his head.

        So use all that is called Fortune.  Most men gamble with her,
and gain all, and lose all, as her wheel rolls.  But do thou leave as
unlawful these winnings, and deal with Cause and Effect, the
chancellors of God.  In the Will work and acquire, and thou hast
chained the wheel of Chance, and shalt sit hereafter out of fear from
her rotations.  A political victory, a rise of rents, the recovery of
your sick, or the return of your absent friend, or some other
favorable event, raises your spirits, and you think good days are
preparing for you.  Do not believe it.  Nothing can bring you peace
but yourself.  Nothing can bring you peace but the triumph of
principles.

 
 
        COMPENSATION
 
 
        The wings of Time are black and white,
        Pied with morning and with night.
        Mountain tall and ocean deep
        Trembling balance duly keep.
        In changing moon, in tidal wave,
        Glows the feud of Want and Have.
        Gauge of more and less through space
        Electric star and pencil plays.
        The lonely Earth amid the balls
        That hurry through the eternal halls,
        A makeweight flying to the void,
        Supplemental asteroid,
        Or compensatory spark,
        Shoots across the neutral Dark.
 
 
        Man's the elm, and Wealth the vine;
        Stanch and strong the tendrils twine:
        Though the frail ringlets thee deceive,
        None from its stock that vine can reave.
        Fear not, then, thou child infirm,
        There's no god dare wrong a worm.
        Laurel crowns cleave to deserts,
        And power to him who power exerts;
        Hast not thy share? On winged feet,
        Lo! it rushes thee to meet;
        And all that Nature made thy own,
        Floating in air or pent in stone,
        Will rive the hills and swim the sea,
        And, like thy shadow, follow thee.
 
 
 
        ESSAY III _Compensation_

        Ever since I was a boy, I have wished to write a discourse on
Compensation: for it seemed to me when very young, that on this
subject life was ahead of theology, and the people knew more than the
preachers taught.  The documents, too, from which the doctrine is to
be drawn, charmed my fancy by their endless variety, and lay always
before me, even in sleep; for they are the tools in our hands, the
bread in our basket, the transactions of the street, the farm, and
the dwelling-house, greetings, relations, debts and credits, the
influence of character, the nature and endowment of all men.  It
seemed to me, also, that in it might be shown men a ray of divinity,
the present action of the soul of this world, clean from all vestige
of tradition, and so the heart of man might be bathed by an
inundation of eternal love, conversing with that which he knows was
always and always must be, because it really is now.  It appeared,
moreover, that if this doctrine could be stated in terms with any
resemblance to those bright intuitions in which this truth is
sometimes revealed to us, it would be a star in many dark hours and
crooked passages in our journey that would not suffer us to lose our
way.

        I was lately confirmed in these desires by hearing a sermon at
church.  The preacher, a man esteemed for his orthodoxy, unfolded in
the ordinary manner the doctrine of the Last Judgment.  He assumed,
that judgment is not executed in this world; that the wicked are
successful; that the good are miserable; and then urged from reason
and from Scripture a compensation to be made to both parties in the
next life.  No offence appeared to be taken by the congregation at
this doctrine.  As far as I could observe, when the meeting broke up,
they separated without remark on the sermon.

        Yet what was the import of this teaching?  What did the
preacher mean by saying that the good are miserable in the present
life?  Was it that houses and lands, offices, wine, horses, dress,
luxury, are had by unprincipled men, whilst the saints are poor and
despised; and that a compensation is to be made to these last
hereafter, by giving them the like gratifications another day, --
bank-stock and doubloons, venison and champagne?  This must be the
compensation intended; for what else?  Is it that they are to have
leave to pray and praise? to love and serve men?  Why, that they can
do now.  The legitimate inference the disciple would draw was, -- `We
are to have _such_ a good time as the sinners have now'; -- or, to
push it to its extreme import, -- `You sin now; we shall sin by and
by; we would sin now, if we could; not being successful, we expect
our revenge to-morrow.'

        The fallacy lay in the immense concession, that the bad are
successful; that justice is not done now.  The blindness of the
preacher consisted in deferring to the base estimate of the market of
what constitutes a manly success, instead of confronting and
convicting the world from the truth; announcing the presence of the
soul; the omnipotence of the will: and so establishing the standard
of good and ill, of success and falsehood.

        I find a similar base tone in the popular religious works of
the day, and the same doctrines assumed by the literary men when
occasionally they treat the related topics.  I think that our popular
theology has gained in decorum, and not in principle, over the
superstitions it has displaced.  But men are better than this
theology.  Their daily life gives it the lie.  Every ingenuous and
aspiring soul leaves the doctrine behind him in his own experience;
and all men feel sometimes the falsehood which they cannot
demonstrate.  For men are wiser than they know.  That which they hear
in schools and pulpits without after-thought, if said in
conversation, would probably be questioned in silence.  If a man
dogmatize in a mixed company on Providence and the divine laws, he is
answered by a silence which conveys well enough to an observer the
dissatisfaction of the hearer, but his incapacity to make his own
statement.

        I shall attempt in this and the following chapter to record
some facts that indicate the path of the law of Compensation; happy
beyond my expectation, if I shall truly draw the smallest arc of this
circle.

        POLARITY, or action and reaction, we meet in every part of
nature; in darkness and light; in heat and cold; in the ebb and flow
of waters; in male and female; in the inspiration and expiration of
plants and animals; in the equation of quantity and quality in the
fluids of the animal body; in the systole and diastole of the heart;
in the undulations of fluids, and of sound; in the centrifugal and
centripetal gravity; in electricity, galvanism, and chemical
affinity.  Superinduce magnetism at one end of a needle; the opposite
magnetism takes place at the other end.  If the south attracts, the
north repels.  To empty here, you must condense there.  An inevitable
dualism bisects nature, so that each thing is a half, and suggests
another thing to make it whole; as, spirit, matter; man, woman; odd,
even; subjective, objective; in, out; upper, under; motion, rest;
yea, nay.

        Whilst the world is thus dual, so is every one of its parts.
The entire system of things gets represented in every particle.
There is somewhat that resembles the ebb and flow of the sea, day and
night, man and woman, in a single needle of the pine, in a kernel of
corn, in each individual of every animal tribe.  The reaction, so
grand in the elements, is repeated within these small boundaries.
For example, in the animal kingdom the physiologist has observed that
no creatures are favorites, but a certain compensation balances every
gift and every defect.  A surplusage given to one part is paid out of
a reduction from another part of the same creature.  If the head and
neck are enlarged, the trunk and extremities are cut short.

        The theory of the mechanic forces is another example.  What we
gain in power is lost in time; and the converse.  The periodic or
compensating errors of the planets is another instance.  The
influences of climate and soil in political history are another.  The
cold climate invigorates.  The barren soil does not breed fevers,
crocodiles, tigers, or scorpions.

        The same dualism underlies the nature and condition of man.
Every excess causes a defect; every defect an excess.  Every sweet
hath its sour; every evil its good.  Every faculty which is a
receiver of pleasure has an equal penalty put on its abuse.  It is to
answer for its moderation with its life.  For every grain of wit
there is a grain of folly.  For every thing you have missed, you have
gained something else; and for every thing you gain, you lose
something.  If riches increase, they are increased that use them.  If
the gatherer gathers too much, nature takes out of the man what she
puts into his chest; swells the estate, but kills the owner.  Nature
hates monopolies and exceptions.  The waves of the sea do not more
speedily seek a level from their loftiest tossing, than the varieties
of condition tend to equalize themselves.  There is always some
levelling circumstance that puts down the overbearing, the strong,
the rich, the fortunate, substantially on the same ground with all
others.  Is a man too strong and fierce for society, and by temper
and position a bad citizen, -- a morose ruffian, with a dash of the
pirate in him;---- nature sends him a troop of pretty sons and
daughters, who are getting along in the dame's classes at the village
school, and love and fear for them smooths his grim scowl to
courtesy.  Thus she contrives to intenerate the granite and felspar,
takes the boar out and puts the lamb in, and keeps her balance true.

        The farmer imagines power and place are fine things.  But the
President has paid dear for his White House.  It has commonly cost
him all his peace, and the best of his manly attributes.  To preserve
for a short time so conspicuous an appearance before the world, he is
content to eat dust before the real masters who stand erect behind
the throne.  Or, do men desire the more substantial and permanent
grandeur of genius?  Neither has this an immunity.  He who by force
of will or of thought is great, and overlooks thousands, has the
charges of that eminence.  With every influx of light comes new
danger.  Has he light? he must bear witness to the light, and always
outrun that sympathy which gives him such keen satisfaction, by his
fidelity to new revelations of the incessant soul.  He must hate
father and mother, wife and child.  Has he all that the world loves
and admires and covets? -- he must cast behind him their admiration,
and afflict them by faithfulness to his truth, and become a byword
and a hissing.

        This law writes the laws of cities and nations.  It is in vain
to build or plot or combine against it.  Things refuse to be
mismanaged long.  _Res nolunt diu male administrari_.  Though no
checks to a new evil appear, the checks exist, and will appear.  If
the government is cruel, the governor's life is not safe.  If you tax
too high, the revenue will yield nothing.  If you make the criminal
code sanguinary, juries will not convict.  If the law is too mild,
private vengeance comes in.  If the government is a terrific
democracy, the pressure is resisted by an overcharge of energy in the
citizen, and life glows with a fiercer flame.  The true life and
satisfactions of man seem to elude the utmost rigors or felicities of
condition, and to establish themselves with great indifferency under
all varieties of circumstances.  Under all governments the influence
of character remains the same, -- in Turkey and in New England about
alike.  Under the primeval despots of Egypt, history honestly
confesses that man must have been as free as culture could make him.

        These appearances indicate the fact that the universe is
represented in every one of its particles.  Every thing in nature
contains all the powers of nature.  Every thing is made of one hidden
stuff; as the naturalist sees one type under every metamorphosis, and
regards a horse as a running man, a fish as a swimming man, a bird as
a flying man, a tree as a rooted man.  Each new form repeats not only
the main character of the type, but part for part all the details,
all the aims, furtherances, hindrances, energies, and whole system of
every other.  Every occupation, trade, art, transaction, is a compend
of the world, and a correlative of every other.  Each one is an
entire emblem of human life; of its good and ill, its trials, its
enemies, its course and its end.  And each one must somehow
accommodate the whole man, and recite all his destiny.

        The world globes itself in a drop of dew.  The microscope
cannot find the animalcule which is less perfect for being little.
Eyes, ears, taste, smell, motion, resistance, appetite, and organs of
reproduction that take hold on eternity, -- all find room to consist
in the small creature.  So do we put our life into every act.  The
true doctrine of omnipresence is, that God reappears with all his
parts in every moss and cobweb.  The value of the universe contrives
to throw itself into every point.  If the good is there, so is the
evil; if the affinity, so the repulsion; if the force, so the
limitation.

        Thus is the universe alive.  All things are moral.  That soul,
which within us is a sentiment, outside of us is a law.  We feel its
inspiration; out there in history we can see its fatal strength.  "It
is in the world, and the world was made by it." Justice is not
postponed.  A perfect equity adjusts its balance in all parts of
life.  {Oi chusoi Dios aei enpiptousi}, -- The dice of God are always
loaded.  The world looks like a multiplication-table, or a
mathematical equation, which, turn it how you will, balances itself.
Take what figure you will, its exact value, nor more nor less, still
returns to you.  Every secret is told, every crime is punished, every
virtue rewarded, every wrong redressed, in silence and certainty.
What we call retribution is the universal necessity by which the
whole appears wherever a part appears.  If you see smoke, there must
be fire.  If you see a hand or a limb, you know that the trunk to
which it belongs is there behind.

        Every act rewards itself, or, in other words, integrates
itself, in a twofold manner; first, in the thing, or in real nature;
and secondly, in the circumstance, or in apparent nature.  Men call
the circumstance the retribution.  The causal retribution is in the
thing, and is seen by the soul.  The retribution in the circumstance
is seen by the understanding; it is inseparable from the thing, but
is often spread over a long time, and so does not become distinct
until after many years.  The specific stripes may follow late after
the offence, but they follow because they accompany it.  Crime and
punishment grow out of one stem.  Punishment is a fruit that
unsuspected ripens within the flower of the pleasure which concealed
it.  Cause and effect, means and ends, seed and fruit, cannot be
severed; for the effect already blooms in the cause, the end
preexists in the means, the fruit in the seed.

        Whilst thus the world will be whole, and refuses to be
disparted, we seek to act partially, to sunder, to appropriate; for
example, -- to gratify the senses, we sever the pleasure of the
senses from the needs of the character.  The ingenuity of man has
always been dedicated to the solution of one problem, -- how to
detach the sensual sweet, the sensual strong, the sensual bright,
&c., from the moral sweet, the moral deep, the moral fair; that is,
again, to contrive to cut clean off this upper surface so thin as to
leave it bottomless; to get a _one end_, without an _other end_.  The
soul says, Eat; the body would feast.  The soul says, The man and
woman shall be one flesh and one soul; the body would join the flesh
only.  The soul says, Have dominion over all things to the ends of
virtue; the body would have the power over things to its own ends.

        The soul strives amain to live and work through all things.  It
would be the only fact.  All things shall be added unto it power,
pleasure, knowledge, beauty.  The particular man aims to be somebody;
to set up for himself; to truck and higgle for a private good; and,
in particulars, to ride, that he may ride; to dress, that he may be
dressed; to eat, that he may eat; and to govern, that he may be seen.
Men seek to be great; they would have offices, wealth, power, and
fame.  They think that to be great is to possess one side of nature,
-- the sweet, without the other side, -- the bitter.

        This dividing and detaching is steadily counteracted.  Up to
this day, it must be owned, no projector has had the smallest
success.  The parted water reunites behind our hand.  Pleasure is
taken out of pleasant things, profit out of profitable things, power
out of strong things, as soon as we seek to separate them from the
whole.  We can no more halve things and get the sensual good, by
itself, than we can get an inside that shall have no outside, or a
light without a shadow.  "Drive out nature with a fork, she comes
running back."

        Life invests itself with inevitable conditions, which the
unwise seek to dodge, which one and another brags that he does not
know; that they do not touch him; -- but the brag is on his lips, the
conditions are in his soul.  If he escapes them in one part, they
attack him in another more vital part.  If he has escaped them in
form, and in the appearance, it is because he has resisted his life,
and fled from himself, and the retribution is so much death.  So
signal is the failure of all attempts to make this separation of the
good from the tax, that the experiment would not be tried, -- since
to try it is to be mad, -- but for the circumstance, that when the
disease began in the will, of rebellion and separation, the intellect
is at once infected, so that the man ceases to see God whole in each
object, but is able to see the sensual allurement of an object, and
not see the sensual hurt; he sees the mermaid's head, but not the
dragon's tail; and thinks he can cut off that which he would have,
from that which he would not have.  "How secret art thou who dwellest
in the highest heavens in silence, O thou only great God, sprinkling
with an unwearied Providence certain penal blindnesses upon such as
have unbridled desires!"

        The human soul is true to these facts in the painting of fable,
of history, of law, of proverbs, of conversation.  It finds a tongue
in literature unawares.  Thus the Greeks called Jupiter, Supreme
Mind; but having traditionally ascribed to him many base actions,
they involuntarily made amends to reason, by tying up the hands of so
bad a god.  He is made as helpless as a king of England.  Prometheus
knows one secret which Jove must bargain for; Minerva, another.  He
cannot get his own thunders; Minerva keeps the key of them.

                 "Of all the gods, I only know the keys
                 That ope the solid doors within whose vaults
                 His thunders sleep."

        A plain confession of the in-working of the All, and of its
moral aim.  The Indian mythology ends in the same ethics; and it
would seem impossible for any fable to be invented and get any
currency which was not moral.  Aurora forgot to ask youth for her
lover, and though Tithonus is immortal, he is old.  Achilles is not
quite invulnerable; the sacred waters did not wash the heel by which
Thetis held him.  Siegfried, in the Nibelungen, is not quite
immortal, for a leaf fell on his back whilst he was bathing in the
dragon's blood, and that spot which it covered is mortal.  And so it
must be.  There is a crack in every thing God has made.  It would
seem, there is always this vindictive circumstance stealing in at
unawares, even into the wild poesy in which the human fancy attempted
to make bold holiday, and to shake itself free of the old laws, --
this back-stroke, this kick of the gun, certifying that the law is
fatal; that in nature nothing can be given, all things are sold.

        This is that ancient doctrine of Nemesis, who keeps watch in
the universe, and lets no offence go unchastised.  The Furies, they
said, are attendants on justice, and if the sun in heaven should
transgress his path, they would punish him.  The poets related that
stone walls, and iron swords, and leathern thongs had an occult
sympathy with the wrongs of their owners; that the belt which Ajax
gave Hector dragged the Trojan hero over the field at the wheels of
the car of Achilles, and the sword which Hector gave Ajax was that on
whose point Ajax fell.  They recorded, that when the Thasians erected
a statue to Theagenes, a victor in the games, one of his rivals went
to it by night, and endeavoured to throw it down by repeated blows,
until at last he moved it from its pedestal, and was crushed to death
beneath its fall.

        This voice of fable has in it somewhat divine.  It came from
thought above the will of the writer.  That is the best part of each
writer, which has nothing private in it; that which he does not know;
that which flowed out of his constitution, and not from his too
active invention; that which in the study of a single artist you
might not easily find, but in the study of many, you would abstract
as the spirit of them all.  Phidias it is not, but the work of man in
that early Hellenic world, that I would know.  The name and
circumstance of Phidias, however convenient for history, embarrass
when we come to the highest criticism.  We are to see that which man
was tending to do in a given period, and was hindered, or, if you
will, modified in doing, by the interfering volitions of Phidias, of
Dante, of Shakspeare, the organ whereby man at the moment wrought.

        Still more striking is the expression of this fact in the
proverbs of all nations, which are always the literature of reason,
or the statements of an absolute truth, without qualification.
Proverbs, like the sacred books of each nation, are the sanctuary of
the intuitions.  That which the droning world, chained to
appearances, will not allow the realist to say in his own words, it
will suffer him to say in proverbs without contradiction.  And this
law of laws which the pulpit, the senate, and the college deny, is
hourly preached in all markets and workshops by flights of proverbs,
whose teaching is as true and as omnipresent as that of birds and
flies.

        All things are double, one against another.  -- Tit for tat; an
eye for an eye; a tooth for a tooth; blood for blood; measure for
measure; love for love.  -- Give and it shall be given you.  -- He
that watereth shall be watered himself.  -- What will you have? quoth
God; pay for it and take it.  -- Nothing venture, nothing have.  --
Thou shalt be paid exactly for what thou hast done, no more, no less.
-- Who doth not work shall not eat.  -- Harm watch, harm catch.  --
Curses always recoil on the head of him who imprecates them.  -- If
you put a chain around the neck of a slave, the other end fastens
itself around your own.  -- Bad counsel confounds the adviser.  --
The Devil is an ass.

        It is thus written, because it is thus in life.  Our action is
overmastered and characterized above our will by the law of nature.
We aim at a petty end quite aside from the public good, but our act
arranges itself by irresistible magnetism in a line with the poles of
the world.

        A man cannot speak but he judges himself.  With his will, or
against his will, he draws his portrait to the eye of his companions
by every word.  Every opinion reacts on him who utters it.  It is a
thread-ball thrown at a mark, but the other end remains in the
thrower's bag.  Or, rather, it is a harpoon hurled at the whale,
unwinding, as it flies, a coil of cord in the boat, and if the
harpoon is not good, or not well thrown, it will go nigh to cut the
steersman in twain, or to sink the boat.

        You cannot do wrong without suffering wrong.  "No man had ever
a point of pride that was not injurious to him," said Burke.  The
exclusive in fashionable life does not see that he excludes himself
from enjoyment, in the attempt to appropriate it.  The exclusionist
in religion does not see that he shuts the door of heaven on himself,
in striving to shut out others.  Treat men as pawns and ninepins, and
you shall suffer as well as they.  If you leave out their heart, you
shall lose your own.  The senses would make things of all persons; of
women, of children, of the poor.  The vulgar proverb, "I will get it
from his purse or get it from his skin," is sound philosophy.

        All infractions of love and equity in our social relations are
speedily punished.  They are punished by fear.  Whilst I stand in
simple relations to my fellow-man, I have no displeasure in meeting
him.  We meet as water meets water, or as two currents of air mix,
with perfect diffusion and interpenetration of nature.  But as soon
as there is any departure from simplicity, and attempt at halfness,
or good for me that is not good for him, my neighbour feels the
wrong; he shrinks from me as far as I have shrunk from him; his eyes
no longer seek mine; there is war between us; there is hate in him
and fear in me.

        All the old abuses in society, universal and particular, all
unjust accumulations of property and power, are avenged in the same
manner.  Fear is an instructer of great sagacity, and the herald of
all revolutions.  One thing he teaches, that there is rottenness
where he appears.  He is a carrion crow, and though you see not well
what he hovers for, there is death somewhere.  Our property is timid,
our laws are timid, our cultivated classes are timid.  Fear for ages
has boded and mowed and gibbered over government and property.  That
obscene bird is not there for nothing.  He indicates great wrongs
which must be revised.

        Of the like nature is that expectation of change which
instantly follows the suspension of our voluntary activity.  The
terror of cloudless noon, the emerald of Polycrates, the awe of
prosperity, the instinct which leads every generous soul to impose on
itself tasks of a noble asceticism and vicarious virtue, are the
tremblings of the balance of justice through the heart and mind of
man.

        Experienced men of the world know very well that it is best to
pay scot and lot as they go along, and that a man often pays dear for
a small frugality.  The borrower runs in his own debt.  Has a man
gained any thing who has received a hundred favors and rendered none?
Has he gained by borrowing, through indolence or cunning, his
neighbour's wares, or horses, or money?  There arises on the deed the
instant acknowledgment of benefit on the one part, and of debt on the
other; that is, of superiority and inferiority.  The transaction
remains in the memory of himself and his neighbour; and every new
transaction alters, according to its nature, their relation to each
other.  He may soon come to see that he had better have broken his
own bones than to have ridden in his neighbour's coach, and that "the
highest price he can pay for a thing is to ask for it."

        A wise man will extend this lesson to all parts of life, and
know that it is the part of prudence to face every claimant, and pay
every just demand on your time, your talents, or your heart.  Always
pay; for, first or last, you must pay your entire debt.  Persons and
events may stand for a time between you and justice, but it is only a
postponement.  You must pay at last your own debt.  If you are wise,
you will dread a prosperity which only loads you with more.  Benefit
is the end of nature.  But for every benefit which you receive, a tax
is levied.  He is great who confers the most benefits.  He is base --
and that is the one base thing in the universe -- to receive favors
and render none.  In the order of nature we cannot render benefits to
those from whom we receive them, or only seldom.  But the benefit we
receive must be rendered again, line for line, deed for deed, cent
for cent, to somebody.  Beware of too much good staying in your hand.
It will fast corrupt and worm worms.  Pay it away quickly in some
sort.

        Labor is watched over by the same pitiless laws.  Cheapest, say
the prudent, is the dearest labor.  What we buy in a broom, a mat, a
wagon, a knife, is some application of good sense to a common want.
It is best to pay in your land a skilful gardener, or to buy good
sense applied to gardening; in your sailor, good sense applied to
navigation; in the house, good sense applied to cooking, sewing,
serving; in your agent, good sense applied to accounts and affairs.
So do you multiply your presence, or spread yourself throughout your
estate.  But because of the dual constitution of things, in labor as
in life there can be no cheating.  The thief steals from himself.
The swindler swindles himself.  For the real price of labor is
knowledge and virtue, whereof wealth and credit are signs.  These
signs, like paper money, may be counterfeited or stolen, but that
which they represent, namely, knowledge and virtue, cannot be
counterfeited or stolen.  These ends of labor cannot be answered but
by real exertions of the mind, and in obedience to pure motives.  The
cheat, the defaulter, the gambler, cannot extort the knowledge of
material and moral nature which his honest care and pains yield to
the operative.  The law of nature is, Do the thing, and you shall
have the power: but they who do not the thing have not the power.

        Human labor, through all its forms, from the sharpening of a
stake to the construction of a city or an epic, is one immense
illustration of the perfect compensation of the universe.  The
absolute balance of Give and Take, the doctrine that every thing has
its price, -- and if that price is not paid, not that thing but
something else is obtained, and that it is impossible to get any
thing without its price, -- is not less sublime in the columns of a
leger than in the budgets of states, in the laws of light and
darkness, in all the action and reaction of nature.  I cannot doubt
that the high laws which each man sees implicated in those processes
with which he is conversant, the stern ethics which sparkle on his
chisel-edge, which are measured out by his plumb and foot-rule, which
stand as manifest in the footing of the shop-bill as in the history
of a state, -- do recommend to him his trade, and though seldom
named, exalt his business to his imagination.

        The league between virtue and nature engages all things to
assume a hostile front to vice.  The beautiful laws and substances of
the world persecute and whip the traitor.  He finds that things are
arranged for truth and benefit, but there is no den in the wide world
to hide a rogue.  Commit a crime, and the earth is made of glass.
Commit a crime, and it seems as if a coat of snow fell on the ground,
such as reveals in the woods the track of every partridge and fox and
squirrel and mole.  You cannot recall the spoken word, you cannot
wipe out the foot-track, you cannot draw up the ladder, so as to
leave no inlet or clew.  Some damning circumstance always transpires.
The laws and substances of nature -- water, snow, wind, gravitation
-- become penalties to the thief.

        On the other hand, the law holds with equal sureness for all
right action.  Love, and you shall be loved.  All love is
mathematically just, as much as the two sides of an algebraic
equation.  The good man has absolute good, which like fire turns
every thing to its own nature, so that you cannot do him any harm;
but as the royal armies sent against Napoleon, when he approached,
cast down their colors and from enemies became friends, so disasters
of all kinds, as sickness, offence, poverty, prove benefactors: --

        "Winds blow and waters roll
        Strength to the brave, and power and deity,
        Yet in themselves are nothing."

        The good are befriended even by weakness and defect.  As no man
had ever a point of pride that was not injurious to him, so no man
had ever a defect that was not somewhere made useful to him.  The
stag in the fable admired his horns and blamed his feet, but when the
hunter came, his feet saved him, and afterwards, caught in the
thicket, his horns destroyed him.  Every man in his lifetime needs to
thank his faults.  As no man thoroughly understands a truth until he
has contended against it, so no man has a thorough acquaintance with
the hindrances or talents of men, until he has suffered from the one,
and seen the triumph of the other over his own want of the same.  Has
he a defect of temper that unfits him to live in society?  Thereby he
is driven to entertain himself alone, and acquire habits of
self-help; and thus, like the wounded oyster, he mends his shell with
pearl.

        Our strength grows out of our weakness.  The indignation which
arms itself with secret forces does not awaken until we are pricked
and stung and sorely assailed.  A great man is always willing to be
little.  Whilst he sits on the cushion of advantages, he goes to
sleep.  When he is pushed, tormented, defeated, he has a chance to
learn something; he has been put on his wits, on his manhood; he has
gained facts; learns his ignorance; is cured of the insanity of
conceit; has got moderation and real skill.  The wise man throws
himself on the side of his assailants.  It is more his interest than
it is theirs to find his weak point.  The wound cicatrizes and falls
off from him like a dead skin, and when they would triumph, lo! he
has passed on invulnerable.  Blame is safer than praise.  I hate to
be defended in a newspaper.  As long as all that is said is said
against me, I feel a certain assurance of success.  But as soon as
honeyed words of praise are spoken for me, I feel as one that lies
unprotected before his enemies.  In general, every evil to which we
do not succumb is a benefactor.  As the Sandwich Islander believes
that the strength and valor of the enemy he kills passes into
himself, so we gain the strength of the temptation we resist.

        The same guards which protect us from disaster, defect, and
enmity, defend us, if we will, from selfishness and fraud.  Bolts and
bars are not the best of our institutions, nor is shrewdness in trade
a mark of wisdom.  Men suffer all their life long, under the foolish
superstition that they can be cheated.  But it is as impossible for a
man to be cheated by any one but himself, as for a thing to be and
not to be at the same time.  There is a third silent party to all our
bargains.  The nature and soul of things takes on itself the guaranty
of the fulfilment of every contract, so that honest service cannot
come to loss.  If you serve an ungrateful master, serve him the more.
Put God in your debt.  Every stroke shall be repaid.  The longer the
payment is withholden, the better for you; for compound interest on
compound interest is the rate and usage of this exchequer.

        The history of persecution is a history of endeavours to cheat
nature, to make water run up hill, to twist a rope of sand.  It makes
no difference whether the actors be many or one, a tyrant or a mob.
A mob is a society of bodies voluntarily bereaving themselves of
reason, and traversing its work.  The mob is man voluntarily
descending to the nature of the beast.  Its fit hour of activity is
night.  Its actions are insane like its whole constitution.  It
persecutes a principle; it would whip a right; it would tar and
feather justice, by inflicting fire and outrage upon the houses and
persons of those who have these.  It resembles the prank of boys, who
run with fire-engines to put out the ruddy aurora streaming to the
stars.  The inviolate spirit turns their spite against the
wrongdoers.  The martyr cannot be dishonored.  Every lash inflicted
is a tongue of fame; every prison, a more illustrious abode; every
burned book or house enlightens the world; every suppressed or
expunged word reverberates through the earth from side to side.
Hours of sanity and consideration are always arriving to communities,
as to individuals, when the truth is seen, and the martyrs are
justified.

        Thus do all things preach the indifferency of circumstances.
The man is all.  Every thing has two sides, a good and an evil.
Every advantage has its tax.  I learn to be content.  But the
doctrine of compensation is not the doctrine of indifferency.  The
thoughtless say, on hearing these representations, -- What boots it
to do well? there is one event to good and evil; if I gain any good,
I must pay for it; if I lose any good, I gain some other; all actions
are indifferent.

        There is a deeper fact in the soul than compensation, to wit,
its own nature.  The soul is not a compensation, but a life.  The
soul _is_.  Under all this running sea of circumstance, whose waters
ebb and flow with perfect balance, lies the aboriginal abyss of real
Being.  Essence, or God, is not a relation, or a part, but the whole.
Being is the vast affirmative, excluding negation, self-balanced, and
swallowing up all relations, parts, and times within itself.  Nature,
truth, virtue, are the influx from thence.  Vice is the absence or
departure of the same.  Nothing, Falsehood, may indeed stand as the
great Night or shade, on which, as a background, the living universe
paints itself forth; but no fact is begotten by it; it cannot work;
for it is not.  It cannot work any good; it cannot work any harm.  It
is harm inasmuch as it is worse not to be than to be.

        We feel defrauded of the retribution due to evil acts, because
the criminal adheres to his vice and contumacy, and does not come to
a crisis or judgment anywhere in visible nature.  There is no
stunning confutation of his nonsense before men and angels.  Has he
therefore outwitted the law?  Inasmuch as he carries the malignity
and the lie with him, he so far deceases from nature.  In some manner
there will be a demonstration of the wrong to the understanding also;
but should we not see it, this deadly deduction makes square the
eternal account.

        Neither can it be said, on the other hand, that the gain of
rectitude must be bought by any loss.  There is no penalty to virtue;
no penalty to wisdom; they are proper additions of being.  In a
virtuous action, I properly _am_; in a virtuous act, I add to the
world; I plant into deserts conquered from Chaos and Nothing, and see
the darkness receding on the limits of the horizon.  There can be no
excess to love; none to knowledge; none to beauty, when these
attributes are considered in the purest sense.  The soul refuses
limits, and always affirms an Optimism, never a Pessimism.

        His life is a progress, and not a station.  His instinct is
trust.  Our instinct uses "more" and "less" in application to man, of
the _presence of the soul_, and not of its absence; the brave man is
greater than the coward; the true, the benevolent, the wise, is more
a man, and not less, than the fool and knave.  There is no tax on the
good of virtue; for that is the incoming of God himself, or absolute
existence, without any comparative.  Material good has its tax, and
if it came without desert or sweat, has no root in me, and the next
wind will blow it away.  But all the good of nature is the soul's,
and may be had, if paid for in nature's lawful coin, that is, by
labor which the heart and the head allow.  I no longer wish to meet a
good I do not earn, for example, to find a pot of buried gold,
knowing that it brings with it new burdens.  I do not wish more
external goods, -- neither possessions, nor honors, nor powers, nor
persons.  The gain is apparent; the tax is certain.  But there is no
tax on the knowledge that the compensation exists, and that it is not
desirable to dig up treasure.  Herein I rejoice with a serene eternal
peace.  I contract the boundaries of possible mischief.  I learn the
wisdom of St. Bernard, -- "Nothing can work me damage except myself;
the harm that I sustain I carry about with me, and never am a real
sufferer but by my own fault."

        In the nature of the soul is the compensation for the
inequalities of condition.  The radical tragedy of nature seems to be
the distinction of More and Less.  How can Less not feel the pain;
how not feel indignation or malevolence towards More?  Look at those
who have less faculty, and one feels sad, and knows not well what to
make of it.  He almost shuns their eye; he fears they will upbraid
God.  What should they do?  It seems a great injustice.  But see the
facts nearly, and these mountainous inequalities vanish.  Love
reduces them, as the sun melts the iceberg in the sea.  The heart and
soul of all men being one, this bitterness of _His_ and _Mine_
ceases.  His is mine.  I am my brother, and my brother is me.  If I
feel overshadowed and outdone by great neighbours, I can yet love; I
can still receive; and he that loveth maketh his own the grandeur he
loves.  Thereby I make the discovery that my brother is my guardian,
acting for me with the friendliest designs, and the estate I so
admired and envied is my own.  It is the nature of the soul to
appropriate all things.  Jesus and Shakspeare are fragments of the
soul, and by love I conquer and incorporate them in my own conscious
domain.  His virtue, -- is not that mine?  His wit, -- if it cannot
be made mine, it is not wit.

        Such, also, is the natural history of calamity.  The changes
which break up at short intervals the prosperity of men are
advertisements of a nature whose law is growth.  Every soul is by
this intrinsic necessity quitting its whole system of things, its
friends, and home, and laws, and faith, as the shell-fish crawls out
of its beautiful but stony case, because it no longer admits of its
growth, and slowly forms a new house.  In proportion to the vigor of
the individual, these revolutions are frequent, until in some happier
mind they are incessant, and all worldly relations hang very loosely
about him, becoming, as it were, a transparent fluid membrane through
which the living form is seen, and not, as in most men, an indurated
heterogeneous fabric of many dates, and of no settled character in
which the man is imprisoned.  Then there can be enlargement, and the
man of to-day scarcely recognizes the man of yesterday.  And such
should be the outward biography of man in time, a putting off of dead
circumstances day by day, as he renews his raiment day by day.  But
to us, in our lapsed estate, resting, not advancing, resisting, not
cooperating with the divine expansion, this growth comes by shocks.

        We cannot part with our friends.  We cannot let our angels go.
We do not see that they only go out, that archangels may come in.  We
are idolaters of the old.  We do not believe in the riches of the
soul, in its proper eternity and omnipresence.  We do not believe
there is any force in to-day to rival or recreate that beautiful
yesterday.  We linger in the ruins of the old tent, where once we had
bread and shelter and organs, nor believe that the spirit can feed,
cover, and nerve us again.  We cannot again find aught so dear, so
sweet, so graceful.  But we sit and weep in vain.  The voice of the
Almighty saith, `Up and onward for evermore!' We cannot stay amid the
ruins.  Neither will we rely on the new; and so we walk ever with
reverted eyes, like those monsters who look backwards.

        And yet the compensations of calamity are made apparent to the
understanding also, after long intervals of time.  A fever, a
mutilation, a cruel disappointment, a loss of wealth, a loss of
friends, seems at the moment unpaid loss, and unpayable.  But the
sure years reveal the deep remedial force that underlies all facts.
The death of a dear friend, wife, brother, lover, which seemed
nothing but privation, somewhat later assumes the aspect of a guide
or genius; for it commonly operates revolutions in our way of life,
terminates an epoch of infancy or of youth which was waiting to be
closed, breaks up a wonted occupation, or a household, or style of
living, and allows the formation of new ones more friendly to the
growth of character.  It permits or constrains the formation of new
acquaintances, and the reception of new influences that prove of the
first importance to the next years; and the man or woman who would
have remained a sunny garden-flower, with no room for its roots and
too much sunshine for its head, by the falling of the walls and the
neglect of the gardener, is made the banian of the forest, yielding
shade and fruit to wide neighbourhoods of men.

 
 
        SPIRITUAL LAWS
 
 
        The living Heaven thy prayers respect,
        House at once and architect,
        Quarrying man's rejected hours,
        Builds therewith eternal towers;
        Sole and self-commanded works,
        Fears not undermining days,
        Grows by decays,
        And, by the famous might that lurks
        In reaction and recoil,
        Makes flame to freeze, and ice to boil;
        Forging, through swart arms of Offence,
        The silver seat of Innocence.

 
 
        ESSAY IV _Spiritual Laws_

        When the act of reflection takes place in the mind, when we
look at ourselves in the light of thought, we discover that our life
is embosomed in beauty.  Behind us, as we go, all things assume
pleasing forms, as clouds do far off.  Not only things familiar and
stale, but even the tragic and terrible, are comely, as they take
their place in the pictures of memory.  The river-bank, the weed at
the water-side, the old house, the foolish person, -- however
neglected in the passing, -- have a grace in the past.  Even the
corpse that has lain in the chambers has added a solemn ornament to
the house.  The soul will not know either deformity or pain.  If, in
the hours of clear reason, we should speak the severest truth, we
should say, that we had never made a sacrifice.  In these hours the
mind seems so great, that nothing can be taken from us that seems
much.  All loss, all pain, is particular; the universe remains to the
heart unhurt.  Neither vexations nor calamities abate our trust.  No
man ever stated his griefs as lightly as he might.  Allow for
exaggeration in the most patient and sorely ridden hack that ever was
driven.  For it is only the finite that has wrought and suffered; the
infinite lies stretched in smiling repose.

        The intellectual life may be kept clean and healthful, if man
will live the life of nature, and not import into his mind
difficulties which are none of his.  No man need be perplexed in his
speculations.  Let him do and say what strictly belongs to him, and,
though very ignorant of books, his nature shall not yield him any
intellectual obstructions and doubts.  Our young people are diseased
with the theological problems of original sin, origin of evil,
predestination, and the like.  These never presented a practical
difficulty to any man, -- never darkened across any man's road, who
did not go out of his way to seek them.  These are the soul's mumps,
and measles, and whooping-coughs, and those who have not caught them
cannot describe their health or prescribe the cure.  A simple mind
will not know these enemies.  It is quite another thing that he
should be able to give account of his faith, and expound to another
the theory of his self-union and freedom.  This requires rare gifts.
Yet, without this self-knowledge, there may be a sylvan strength and
integrity in that which he is.  "A few strong instincts and a few
plain rules" suffice us.

        My will never gave the images in my mind the rank they now
take.  The regular course of studies, the years of academical and
professional education, have not yielded me better facts than some
idle books under the bench at the Latin School.  What we do not call
education is more precious than that which we call so.  We form no
guess, at the time of receiving a thought, of its comparative value.
And education often wastes its effort in attempts to thwart and balk
this natural magnetism, which is sure to select what belongs to it.

        In like manner, our moral nature is vitiated by any
interference of our will.  People represent virtue as a struggle, and
take to themselves great airs upon their attainments, and the
question is everywhere vexed, when a noble nature is commended,
whether the man is not better who strives with temptation.  But there
is no merit in the matter.  Either God is there, or he is not there.
We love characters in proportion as they are impulsive and
spontaneous.  The less a man thinks or knows about his virtues, the
better we like him.  Timoleon's victories are the best victories;
which ran and flowed like Homer's verses, Plutarch said.  When we see
a soul whose acts are all regal, graceful, and pleasant as roses, we
must thank God that such things can be and are, and not turn sourly
on the angel, and say, `Crump is a better man with his grunting
resistance to all his native devils.'

        Not less conspicuous is the preponderance of nature over will
in all practical life.  There is less intention in history than we
ascribe to it.  We impute deep-laid, far-sighted plans to Caesar and
Napoleon; but the best of their power was in nature, not in them.
Men of an extraordinary success, in their honest moments, have always
sung, `Not unto us, not unto us.' According to the faith of their
times, they have built altars to Fortune, or to Destiny, or to St.
Julian.  Their success lay in their parallelism to the course of
thought, which found in them an unobstructed channel; and the wonders
of which they were the visible conductors seemed to the eye their
deed.  Did the wires generate the galvanism?  It is even true that
there was less in them on which they could reflect, than in another;
as the virtue of a pipe is to be smooth and hollow.  That which
externally seemed will and immovableness was willingness and
self-annihilation.  Could Shakspeare give a theory of Shakspeare?
Could ever a man of prodigious mathematical genius convey to others
any insight into his methods?  If he could communicate that secret,
it would instantly lose its exaggerated value, blending with the
daylight and the vital energy the power to stand and to go.

        The lesson is forcibly taught by these observations, that our
life might be much easier and simpler than we make it; that the world
might be a happier place than it is; that there is no need of
struggles, convulsions, and despairs, of the wringing of the hands
and the gnashing of the teeth; that we miscreate our own evils.  We
interfere with the optimism of nature; for, whenever we get this
vantage-ground of the past, or of a wiser mind in the present, we are
able to discern that we are begirt with laws which execute
themselves.

        The face of external nature teaches the same lesson.  Nature
will not have us fret and fume.  She does not like our benevolence or
our learning much better than she likes our frauds and wars.  When we
come out of the caucus, or the bank, or the Abolition-convention, or
the Temperance-meeting, or the Transcendental club, into the fields
and woods, she says to us, `So hot? my little Sir.'

        We are full of mechanical actions.  We must needs intermeddle,
and have things in our own way, until the sacrifices and virtues of
society are odious.  Love should make joy; but our benevolence is
unhappy.  Our Sunday-schools, and churches, and pauper-societies are
yokes to the neck.  We pain ourselves to please nobody.  There are
natural ways of arriving at the same ends at which these aim, but do
not arrive.  Why should all virtue work in one and the same way?  Why
should all give dollars?  It is very inconvenient to us country folk,
and we do not think any good will come of it.  We have not dollars;
merchants have; let them give them.  Farmers will give corn; poets
will sing; women will sew; laborers will lend a hand; the children
will bring flowers.  And why drag this dead weight of a Sunday-school
over the whole Christendom?  It is natural and beautiful that
childhood should inquire, and maturity should teach; but it is time
enough to answer questions when they are asked.  Do not shut up the
young people against their will in a pew, and force the children to
ask them questions for an hour against their will.

        If we look wider, things are all alike; laws, and letters, and
creeds, and modes of living, seem a travestie of truth.  Our society
is encumbered by ponderous machinery, which resembles the endless
aqueducts which the Romans built over hill and dale, and which are
superseded by the discovery of the law that water rises to the level
of its source.  It is a Chinese wall which any nimble Tartar can leap
over.  It is a standing army, not so good as a peace.  It is a
graduated, titled, richly appointed empire, quite superfluous when
town-meetings are found to answer just as well.

        Let us draw a lesson from nature, which always works by short
ways.  When the fruit is ripe, it falls.  When the fruit is
despatched, the leaf falls.  The circuit of the waters is mere
falling.  The walking of man and all animals is a falling forward.
All our manual labor and works of strength, as prying, splitting,
digging, rowing, and so forth, are done by dint of continual falling,
and the globe, earth, moon, comet, sun, star, fall for ever and ever.

        The simplicity of the universe is very different from the
simplicity of a machine.  He who sees moral nature out and out, and
thoroughly knows how knowledge is acquired and character formed, is a
pedant.  The simplicity of nature is not that which may easily be
read, but is inexhaustible.  The last analysis can no wise be made.
We judge of a man's wisdom by his hope, knowing that the perception
of the inexhaustibleness of nature is an immortal youth.  The wild
fertility of nature is felt in comparing our rigid names and
reputations with our fluid consciousness.  We pass in the world for
sects and schools, for erudition and piety, and we are all the time
jejune babes.  One sees very well how Pyrrhonism grew up.  Every man
sees that he is that middle point, whereof every thing may be
affirmed and denied with equal reason.  He is old, he is young, he is
very wise, he is altogether ignorant.  He hears and feels what you
say of the seraphim, and of the tin-pedler.  There is no permanent
wise man, except in the figment of the Stoics.  We side with the
hero, as we read or paint, against the coward and the robber; but we
have been ourselves that coward and robber, and shall be again, not
in the low circumstance, but in comparison with the grandeurs
possible to the soul.

        A little consideration of what takes place around us every day
would show us, that a higher law than that of our will regulates
events; that our painful labors are unnecessary, and fruitless; that
only in our easy, simple, spontaneous action are we strong, and by
contenting ourselves with obedience we become divine.  Belief and
love, -- a believing love will relieve us of a vast load of care.  O
my brothers, God exists.  There is a soul at the centre of nature,
and over the will of every man, so that none of us can wrong the
universe.  It has so infused its strong enchantment into nature, that
we prosper when we accept its advice, and when we struggle to wound
its creatures, our hands are glued to our sides, or they beat our own
breasts.  The whole course of things goes to teach us faith.  We need
only obey.  There is guidance for each of us, and by lowly listening
we shall hear the right word.  Why need you choose so painfully your
place, and occupation, and associates, and modes of action, and of
entertainment?  Certainly there is a possible right for you that
precludes the need of balance and wilful election.  For you there is
a reality, a fit place and congenial duties.  Place yourself in the
middle of the stream of power and wisdom which animates all whom it
floats, and you are without effort impelled to truth, to right, and a
perfect contentment.  Then you put all gainsayers in the wrong.  Then
you are the world, the measure of right, of truth, of beauty.  If we
will not be mar-plots with our miserable interferences, the work, the
society, letters, arts, science, religion of men would go on far
better than now, and the heaven predicted from the beginning of the
world, and still predicted from the bottom of the heart, would
organize itself, as do now the rose, and the air, and the sun.

        I say, _do not choose_; but that is a figure of speech by which
I would distinguish what is commonly called _choice_ among men, and
which is a partial act, the choice of the hands, of the eyes, of the
appetites, and not a whole act of the man.  But that which I call
right or goodness is the choice of my constitution; and that which I
call heaven, and inwardly aspire after, is the state or circumstance
desirable to my constitution; and the action which I in all my years
tend to do, is the work for my faculties.  We must hold a man
amenable to reason for the choice of his daily craft or profession.
It is not an excuse any longer for his deeds, that they are the
custom of his trade.  What business has he with an evil trade?  Has
he not a _calling_ in his character.

        Each man has his own vocation.  The talent is the call.  There
is one direction in which all space is open to him.  He has faculties
silently inviting him thither to endless exertion.  He is like a ship
in a river; he runs against obstructions on every side but one; on
that side all obstruction is taken away, and he sweeps serenely over
a deepening channel into an infinite sea.  This talent and this call
depend on his organization, or the mode in which the general soul
incarnates itself in him.  He inclines to do something which is easy
to him, and good when it is done, but which no other man can do.  He
has no rival.  For the more truly he consults his own powers, the
more difference will his work exhibit from the work of any other.
His ambition is exactly proportioned to his powers.  The height of
the pinnacle is determined by the breadth of the base.  Every man has
this call of the power to do somewhat unique, and no man has any
other call.  The pretence that he has another call, a summons by name
and personal election and outward "signs that mark him extraordinary,
and not in the roll of common men," is fanaticism, and betrays
obtuseness to perceive that there is one mind in all the individuals,
and no respect of persons therein.

        By doing his work, he makes the need felt which he can supply,
and creates the taste by which he is enjoyed.  By doing his own work,
he unfolds himself.  It is the vice of our public speaking that it
has not abandonment.  Somewhere, not only every orator but every man
should let out all the length of all the reins; should find or make a
frank and hearty expression of what force and meaning is in him.  The
common experience is, that the man fits himself as well as he can to
the customary details of that work or trade he falls into, and tends
it as a dog turns a spit.  Then is he a part of the machine he moves;
the man is lost.  Until he can manage to communicate himself to
others in his full stature and proportion, he does not yet find his
vocation.  He must find in that an outlet for his character, so that
he may justify his work to their eyes.  If the labor is mean, let him
by his thinking and character make it liberal.  Whatever he knows and
thinks, whatever in his apprehension is worth doing, that let him
communicate, or men will never know and honor him aright.  Foolish,
whenever you take the meanness and formality of that thing you do,
instead of converting it into the obedient spiracle of your character
and aims.

        We like only such actions as have already long had the praise
of men, and do not perceive that any thing man can do may be divinely
done.  We think greatness entailed or organized in some places or
duties, in certain offices or occasions, and do not see that Paganini
can extract rapture from a catgut, and Eulenstein from a jews-harp,
and a nimble-fingered lad out of shreds of paper with his scissors,
and Landseer out of swine, and the hero out of the pitiful habitation
and company in which he was hidden.  What we call obscure condition
or vulgar society is that condition and society whose poetry is not
yet written, but which you shall presently make as enviable and
renowned as any.  In our estimates, let us take a lesson from kings.
The parts of hospitality, the connection of families, the
impressiveness of death, and a thousand other things, royalty makes
its own estimate of, and a royal mind will.  To make habitually a new
estimate, -- that is elevation.

        What a man does, that he has.  What has he to do with hope or
fear?  In himself is his might.  Let him regard no good as solid, but
that which is in his nature, and which must grow out of him as long
as he exists.  The goods of fortune may come and go like summer
leaves; let him scatter them on every wind as the momentary signs of
his infinite productiveness.

        He may have his own.  A man's genius, the quality that
differences him from every other, the susceptibility to one class of
influences, the selection of what is fit for him, the rejection of
what is unfit, determines for him the character of the universe.  A
man is a method, a progressive arrangement; a selecting principle,
gathering his like to him, wherever he goes.  He takes only his own
out of the multiplicity that sweeps and circles round him.  He is
like one of those booms which are set out from the shore on rivers to
catch drift-wood, or like the loadstone amongst splinters of steel.
Those facts, words, persons, which dwell in his memory without his
being able to say why, remain, because they have a relation to him
not less real for being as yet unapprehended.  They are symbols of
value to him, as they can interpret parts of his consciousness which
he would vainly seek words for in the conventional images of books
and other minds.  What attracts my attention shall have it, as I will
go to the man who knocks at my door, whilst a thousand persons, as
worthy, go by it, to whom I give no regard.  It is enough that these
particulars speak to me.  A few anecdotes, a few traits of character,
manners, face, a few incidents, have an emphasis in your memory out
of all proportion to their apparent significance, if you measure them
by the ordinary standards.  They relate to your gift.  Let them have
their weight, and do not reject them, and cast about for illustration
and facts more usual in literature.  What your heart thinks great is
great.  The soul's emphasis is always right.

        Over all things that are agreeable to his nature and genius,
the man has the highest right.  Everywhere he may take what belongs
to his spiritual estate, nor can he take any thing else, though all
doors were open, nor can all the force of men hinder him from taking
so much.  It is vain to attempt to keep a secret from one who has a
right to know it.  It will tell itself.  That mood into which a
friend can bring us is his dominion over us.  To the thoughts of that
state of mind he has a right.  All the secrets of that state of mind
he can compel.  This is a law which statesmen use in practice.  All
the terrors of the French Republic, which held Austria in awe, were
unable to command her diplomacy.  But Napoleon sent to Vienna M. de
Narbonne, one of the old noblesse, with the morals, manners, and name
of that interest, saying, that it was indispensable to send to the
old aristocracy of Europe men of the same connection, which, in fact,
constitutes a sort of free-masonry.  M. de Narbonne, in less than a
fortnight, penetrated all the secrets of the imperial cabinet.

        Nothing seems so easy as to speak and to be understood.  Yet a
man may come to find _that_ the strongest of defences and of ties, --
that he has been understood; and he who has received an opinion may
come to find it the most inconvenient of bonds.

        If a teacher have any opinion which he wishes to conceal, his
pupils will become as fully indoctrinated into that as into any which
he publishes.  If you pour water into a vessel twisted into coils and
angles, it is vain to say, I will pour it only into this or that; --
it will find its level in all.  Men feel and act the consequences of
your doctrine, without being able to show how they follow.  Show us
an arc of the curve, and a good mathematician will find out the whole
figure.  We are always reasoning from the seen to the unseen.  Hence
the perfect intelligence that subsists between wise men of remote
ages.  A man cannot bury his meanings so deep in his book, but time
and like-minded men will find them.  Plato had a secret doctrine, had
he?  What secret can he conceal from the eyes of Bacon? of Montaigne?
of Kant?  Therefore, Aristotle said of his works, "They are published
and not published."

        No man can learn what he has not preparation for learning,
however near to his eyes is the object.  A chemist may tell his most
precious secrets to a carpenter, and he shall be never the wiser, --
the secrets he would not utter to a chemist for an estate.  God
screens us evermore from premature ideas.  Our eyes are holden that
we cannot see things that stare us in the face, until the hour
arrives when the mind is ripened; then we behold them, and the time
when we saw them not is like a dream.

        Not in nature but in man is all the beauty and worth he sees.
The world is very empty, and is indebted to this gilding, exalting
soul for all its pride.  "Earth fills her lap with splendors" _not
her own_.  The vale of Tempe, Tivoli, and Rome are earth and water,
rocks and sky.  There are as good earth and water in a thousand
places, yet how unaffecting!

        People are not the better for the sun and moon, the horizon and
the trees; as it is not observed that the keepers of Roman galleries,
or the valets of painters, have any elevation of thought, or that
librarians are wiser men than others.  There are graces in the
demeanour of a polished and noble person, which are lost upon the eye
of a churl.  These are like the stars whose light has not yet reached
us.

 
        He may see what he maketh.  Our dreams are the sequel of our
waking knowledge.  The visions of the night bear some proportion to
the visions of the day.  Hideous dreams are exaggerations of the sins
of the day.  We see our evil affections embodied in bad
physiognomies.  On the Alps, the traveller sometimes beholds his own
shadow magnified to a giant, so that every gesture of his hand is
terrific.  "My children," said an old man to his boys scared by a
figure in the dark entry, "my children, you will never see any thing
worse than yourselves." As in dreams, so in the scarcely less fluid
events of the world, every man sees himself in colossal, without
knowing that it is himself.  The good, compared to the evil which he
sees, is as his own good to his own evil.  Every quality of his mind
is magnified in some one acquaintance, and every emotion of his heart
in some one.  He is like a quincunx of trees, which counts five,
east, west, north, or south; or, an initial, medial, and terminal
acrostic.  And why not?  He cleaves to one person, and avoids
another, according to their likeness or unlikeness to himself, truly
seeking himself in his associates, and moreover in his trade, and
habits, and gestures, and meats, and drinks; and comes at last to be
faithfully represented by every view you take of his circumstances.

        He may read what he writes.  What can we see or acquire, but
what we are?  You have observed a skilful man reading Virgil.  Well,
that author is a thousand books to a thousand persons.  Take the book
into your two hands, and read your eyes out; you will never find what
I find.  If any ingenious reader would have a monopoly of the wisdom
or delight he gets, he is as secure now the book is Englished, as if
it were imprisoned in the Pelews' tongue.  It is with a good book as
it is with good company.  Introduce a base person among gentlemen; it
is all to no purpose; he is not their fellow.  Every society protects
itself.  The company is perfectly safe, and he is not one of them,
though his body is in the room.

        What avails it to fight with the eternal laws of mind, which
adjust the relation of all persons to each other, by the mathematical
measure of their havings and beings?  Gertrude is enamoured of Guy;
how high, how aristocratic, how Roman his mien and manners! to live
with him were life indeed, and no purchase is too great; and heaven
and earth are moved to that end.  Well, Gertrude has Guy; but what
now avails how high, how aristocratic, how Roman his mien and
manners, if his heart and aims are in the senate, in the theatre, and
in the billiard-room, and she has no aims, no conversation, that can
enchant her graceful lord?

        He shall have his own society.  We can love nothing but nature.
The most wonderful talents, the most meritorious exertions, really
avail very little with us; but nearness or likeness of nature, -- how
beautiful is the ease of its victory!  Persons approach us famous for
their beauty, for their accomplishments, worthy of all wonder for
their charms and gifts; they dedicate their whole skill to the hour
and the company, with very imperfect result.  To be sure, it would be
ungrateful in us not to praise them loudly.  Then, when all is done,
a person of related mind, a brother or sister by nature, comes to us
so softly and easily, so nearly and intimately, as if it were the
blood in our proper veins, that we feel as if some one was gone,
instead of another having come; we are utterly relieved and
refreshed; it is a sort of joyful solitude.  We foolishly think in
our days of sin, that we must court friends by compliance to the
customs of society, to its dress, its breeding, and its estimates.
But only that soul can be my friend which I encounter on the line of
my own march, that soul to which I do not decline, and which does not
decline to me, but, native of the same celestial latitude, repeats in
its own all my experience.  The scholar forgets himself, and apes the
customs and costumes of the man of the world, to deserve the smile of
beauty, and follows some giddy girl, not yet taught by religious
passion to know the noble woman with all that is serene, oracular,
and beautiful in her soul.  Let him be great, and love shall follow
him.  Nothing is more deeply punished than the neglect of the
affinities by which alone society should be formed, and the insane
levity of choosing associates by others' eyes.

        He may set his own rate.  It is a maxim worthy of all
acceptation, that a man may have that allowance he takes.  Take the
place and attitude which belong to you, and all men acquiesce.  The
world must be just.  It leaves every man, with profound unconcern, to
set his own rate.  Hero or driveller, it meddles not in the matter.
It will certainly accept your own measure of your doing and being,
whether you sneak about and deny your own name, or whether you see
your work produced to the concave sphere of the heavens, one with the
revolution of the stars.

        The same reality pervades all teaching.  The man may teach by
doing, and not otherwise.  If he can communicate himself, he can
teach, but not by words.  He teaches who gives, and he learns who
receives.  There is no teaching until the pupil is brought into the
same state or principle in which you are; a transfusion takes place;
he is you, and you are he; then is a teaching; and by no unfriendly
chance or bad company can he ever quite lose the benefit.  But your
propositions run out of one ear as they ran in at the other.  We see
it advertised that Mr. Grand will deliver an oration on the Fourth of
July, and Mr. Hand before the Mechanics' Association, and we do not
go thither, because we know that these gentlemen will not communicate
their own character and experience to the company.  If we had reason
to expect such a confidence, we should go through all inconvenience
and opposition.  The sick would be carried in litters.  But a public
oration is an escapade, a non-committal, an apology, a gag, and not a
communication, not a speech, not a man.

        A like Nemesis presides over all intellectual works.  We have
yet to learn, that the thing uttered in words is not therefore
affirmed.  It must affirm itself, or no forms of logic or of oath can
give it evidence.  The sentence must also contain its own apology for
being spoken.

        The effect of any writing on the public mind is mathematically
measurable by its depth of thought.  How much water does it draw?  If
it awaken you to think, if it lift you from your feet with the great
voice of eloquence, then the effect is to be wide, slow, permanent,
over the minds of men; if the pages instruct you not, they will die
like flies in the hour.  The way to speak and write what shall not go
out of fashion is, to speak and write sincerely.  The argument which
has not power to reach my own practice, I may well doubt, will fail
to reach yours.  But take Sidney's maxim: -- "Look in thy heart, and
write." He that writes to himself writes to an eternal public.  That
statement only is fit to be made public, which you have come at in
attempting to satisfy your own curiosity.  The writer who takes his
subject from his ear, and not from his heart, should know that he has
lost as much as he seems to have gained, and when the empty book has
gathered all its praise, and half the people say, `What poetry!  what
genius!' it still needs fuel to make fire.  That only profits which
is profitable.  Life alone can impart life; and though we should
burst, we can only be valued as we make ourselves valuable.  There is
no luck in literary reputation.  They who make up the final verdict
upon every book are not the partial and noisy readers of the hour
when it appears; but a court as of angels, a public not to be bribed,
not to be entreated, and not to be overawed, decides upon every man's
title to fame.  Only those books come down which deserve to last.
Gilt edges, vellum, and morocco, and presentation-copies to all the
libraries, will not preserve a book in circulation beyond its
intrinsic date.  It must go with all Walpole's Noble and Royal
Authors to its fate.  Blackmore, Kotzebue, or Pollok may endure for a
night, but Moses and Homer stand for ever.  There are not in the
world at any one time more than a dozen persons who read and
understand Plato: -- never enough to pay for an edition of his works;
yet to every generation these come duly down, for the sake of those
few persons, as if God brought them in his hand.  "No book," said
Bentley, "was ever written down by any but itself." The permanence of
all books is fixed by no effort friendly or hostile, but by their own
specific gravity, or the intrinsic importance of their contents to
the constant mind of man.  "Do not trouble yourself too much about
the light on your statue," said Michel Angelo to the young sculptor;
"the light of the public square will test its value."

        In like manner the effect of every action is measured by the
depth of the sentiment from which it proceeds.  The great man knew
not that he was great.  It took a century or two for that fact to
appear.  What he did, he did because he must; it was the most natural
thing in the world, and grew out of the circumstances of the moment.
But now, every thing he did, even to the lifting of his finger or the
eating of bread, looks large, all-related, and is called an
institution.

        These are the demonstrations in a few particulars of the genius
of nature; they show the direction of the stream.  But the stream is
blood; every drop is alive.  Truth has not single victories; all
things are its organs, -- not only dust and stones, but errors and
lies.  The laws of disease, physicians say, are as beautiful as the
laws of health.  Our philosophy is affirmative, and readily accepts
the testimony of negative facts, as every shadow points to the sun.
By a divine necessity, every fact in nature is constrained to offer
its testimony.

        Human character evermore publishes itself.  The most fugitive
deed and word, the mere air of doing a thing, the intimated purpose,
expresses character.  If you act, you show character; if you sit
still, if you sleep, you show it.  You think, because you have spoken
nothing when others spoke, and have given no opinion on the times, on
the church, on slavery, on marriage, on socialism, on secret
societies, on the college, on parties and persons, that your verdict
is still expected with curiosity as a reserved wisdom.  Far
otherwise; your silence answers very loud.  You have no oracle to
utter, and your fellow-men have learned that you cannot help them;
for, oracles speak.  Doth not wisdom cry, and understanding put forth
her voice?

        Dreadful limits are set in nature to the powers of
dissimulation.  Truth tyrannizes over the unwilling members of the
body.  Faces never lie, it is said.  No man need be deceived, who
will study the changes of expression.  When a man speaks the truth in
the spirit of truth, his eye is as clear as the heavens.  When he has
base ends, and speaks falsely, the eye is muddy and sometimes
asquint.

        I have heard an experienced counsellor say, that he never
feared the effect upon a jury of a lawyer who does not believe in his
heart that his client ought to have a verdict.  If he does not
believe it, his unbelief will appear to the jury, despite all his
protestations, and will become their unbelief.  This is that law
whereby a work of art, of whatever kind, sets us in the same state of
mind wherein the artist was when he made it.  That which we do not
believe, we cannot adequately say, though we may repeat the words
never so often.  It was this conviction which Swedenborg expressed,
when he described a group of persons in the spiritual world
endeavouring in vain to articulate a proposition which they did not
believe; but they could not, though they twisted and folded their
lips even to indignation.

 
        A man passes for that he is worth.  Very idle is all curiosity
concerning other people's estimate of us, and all fear of remaining
unknown is not less so.  If a man know that he can do any thing, --
that he can do it better than any one else, -- he has a pledge of the
acknowledgment of that fact by all persons.  The world is full of
judgment-days, and into every assembly that a man enters, in every
action he attempts, he is gauged and stamped.  In every troop of boys
that whoop and run in each yard and square, a new-comer is as well
and accurately weighed in the course of a few days, and stamped with
his right number, as if he had undergone a formal trial of his
strength, speed, and temper.  A stranger comes from a distant school,
with better dress, with trinkets in his pockets, with airs and
pretensions: an older boy says to himself, `It 's of no use; we shall
find him out to-morrow.' `What has he done?' is the divine question
which searches men, and transpierces every false reputation.  A fop
may sit in any chair of the world, nor be distinguished for his hour
from Homer and Washington; but there need never be any doubt
concerning the respective ability of human beings.  Pretension may
sit still, but cannot act.  Pretension never feigned an act of real
greatness.  Pretension never wrote an Iliad, nor drove back Xerxes,
nor christianized the world, nor abolished slavery.

        As much virtue as there is, so much appears; as much goodness
as there is, so much reverence it commands.  All the devils respect
virtue.  The high, the generous, the self-devoted sect will always
instruct and command mankind.  Never was a sincere word utterly lost.
Never a magnanimity fell to the ground, but there is some heart to
greet and accept it unexpectedly.  A man passes for that he is worth.
What he is engraves itself on his face, on his form, on his fortunes,
in letters of light.  Concealment avails him nothing; boasting
nothing.  There is confession in the glances of our eyes; in our
smiles; in salutations; and the grasp of hands.  His sin bedaubs him,
mars all his good impression.  Men know not why they do not trust
him; but they do not trust him.  His vice glasses his eye, cuts lines
of mean expression in his cheek, pinches the nose, sets the mark of
the beast on the back of the head, and writes O fool! fool! on the
forehead of a king.

 
        If you would not be known to do any thing, never do it.  A man
may play the fool in the drifts of a desert, but every grain of sand
shall seem to see.  He may be a solitary eater, but he cannot keep
his foolish counsel.  A broken complexion, a swinish look, ungenerous
acts, and the want of due knowledge, -- all blab.  Can a cook, a
Chiffinch, an Iachimo be mistaken for Zeno or Paul?  Confucius
exclaimed, -- "How can a man be concealed!  How can a man be
concealed!"

        On the other hand, the hero fears not, that, if he withhold the
avowal of a just and brave act, it will go unwitnessed and unloved.
One knows it, -- himself, -- and is pledged by it to sweetness of
peace, and to nobleness of aim, which will prove in the end a better
proclamation of it than the relating of the incident.  Virtue is the
adherence in action to the nature of things, and the nature of things
makes it prevalent.  It consists in a perpetual substitution of being
for seeming, and with sublime propriety God is described as saying, I
AM.

        The lesson which these observations convey is, Be, and not
seem.  Let us acquiesce.  Let us take our bloated nothingness out of
the path of the divine circuits.  Let us unlearn our wisdom of the
world.  Let us lie low in the Lord's power, and learn that truth
alone makes rich and great.

        If you visit your friend, why need you apologize for not having
visited him, and waste his time and deface your own act?  Visit him
now.  Let him feel that the highest love has come to see him, in
thee, its lowest organ.  Or why need you torment yourself and friend
by secret self-reproaches that you have not assisted him or
complimented him with gifts and salutations heretofore?  Be a gift
and a benediction.  Shine with real light, and not with the borrowed
reflection of gifts.  Common men are apologies for men; they bow the
head, excuse themselves with prolix reasons, and accumulate
appearances, because the substance is not.

        We are full of these superstitions of sense, the worship of
magnitude.  We call the poet inactive, because he is not a president,
a merchant, or a porter.  We adore an institution, and do not see
that it is founded on a thought which we have.  But real action is in
silent moments.  The epochs of our life are not in the visible facts
of our choice of a calling, our marriage, our acquisition of an
office, and the like, but in a silent thought by the way-side as we
walk; in a thought which revises our entire manner of life, and says,
-- `Thus hast thou done, but it were better thus.'  And all our after
years, like menials, serve and wait on this, and, according to their
ability, execute its will.  This revisal or correction is a constant
force, which, as a tendency, reaches through our lifetime.  The
object of the man, the aim of these moments, is to make daylight
shine through him, to suffer the law to traverse his whole being
without obstruction, so that, on what point soever of his doing your
eye falls, it shall report truly of his character, whether it be his
diet, his house, his religious forms, his society, his mirth, his
vote, his opposition.  Now he is not homogeneous, but heterogeneous,
and the ray does not traverse; there are no thorough lights: but the
eye of the beholder is puzzled, detecting many unlike tendencies, and
a life not yet at one.

        Why should we make it a point with our false modesty to
disparage that man we are, and that form of being assigned to us?  A
good man is contented.  I love and honor Epaminondas, but I do not
wish to be Epaminondas.  I hold it more just to love the world of
this hour, than the world of his hour.  Nor can you, if I am true,
excite me to the least uneasiness by saying, `He acted, and thou
sittest still.' I see action to be good, when the need is, and
sitting still to be also good.  Epaminondas, if he was the man I take
him for, would have sat still with joy and peace, if his lot had been
mine.  Heaven is large, and affords space for all modes of love and
fortitude.  Why should we be busybodies and superserviceable?  Action
and inaction are alike to the true.  One piece of the tree is cut for
a weathercock, and one for the sleeper of a bridge; the virtue of the
wood is apparent in both.

        I desire not to disgrace the soul.  The fact that I am here
certainly shows me that the soul had need of an organ here.  Shall I
not assume the post?  Shall I skulk and dodge and duck with my
unseasonable apologies and vain modesty, and imagine my being here
impertinent? less pertinent than Epaminondas or Homer being there?
and that the soul did not know its own needs?  Besides, without any
reasoning on the matter, I have no discontent.  The good soul
nourishes me, and unlocks new magazines of power and enjoyment to me
every day.  I will not meanly decline the immensity of good, because
I have heard that it has come to others in another shape.

        Besides, why should we be cowed by the name of Action?  'T is a
trick of the senses, -- no more.  We know that the ancestor of every
action is a thought.  The poor mind does not seem to itself to be any
thing, unless it have an outside badge, -- some Gentoo diet, or
Quaker coat, or Calvinistic prayer-meeting, or philanthropic society,
or a great donation, or a high office, or, any how, some wild
contrasting action to testify that it is somewhat.  The rich mind
lies in the sun and sleeps, and is Nature.  To think is to act.

        Let us, if we must have great actions, make our own so.  All
action is of an infinite elasticity, and the least admits of being
inflated with the celestial air until it eclipses the sun and moon.
Let us seek _one_ peace by fidelity.  Let me heed my duties.  Why
need I go gadding into the scenes and philosophy of Greek and Italian
history, before I have justified myself to my benefactors?  How dare
I read Washington's campaigns, when I have not answered the letters
of my own correspondents?  Is not that a just objection to much of
our reading?  It is a pusillanimous desertion of our work to gaze
after our neighbours.  It is peeping.  Byron says of Jack Bunting, --

        "He knew not what to say, and so he swore."

        I may say it of our preposterous use of books, -- He knew not
what to do, and so _he read_.  I can think of nothing to fill my time
with, and I find the Life of Brant.  It is a very extravagant
compliment to pay to Brant, or to General Schuyler, or to General
Washington.  My time should be as good as their time, -- my facts, my
net of relations, as good as theirs, or either of theirs.  Rather let
me do my work so well that other idlers, if they choose, may compare
my texture with the texture of these and find it identical with the
best.

        This over-estimate of the possibilities of Paul and Pericles,
this under-estimate of our own, comes from a neglect of the fact of
an identical nature.  Bonaparte knew but one merit, and rewarded in
one and the same way the good soldier, the good astronomer, the good
poet, the good player.  The poet uses the names of Caesar, of
Tamerlane, of Bonduca, of Belisarius; the painter uses the
conventional story of the Virgin Mary, of Paul, of Peter.  He does
not, therefore, defer to the nature of these accidental men, of these
stock heroes.  If the poet write a true drama, then he is Caesar, and
not the player of Caesar; then the selfsame strain of thought,
emotion as pure, wit as subtle, motions as swift, mounting,
extravagant, and a heart as great, self-sufficing, dauntless, which
on the waves of its love and hope can uplift all that is reckoned
solid and precious in the world, -- palaces, gardens, money, navies,
kingdoms, -- marking its own incomparable worth by the slight it
casts on these gauds of men, -- these all are his, and by the power
of these he rouses the nations.  Let a man believe in God, and not in
names and places and persons.  Let the great soul incarnated in some
woman's form, poor and sad and single, in some Dolly or Joan, go out
to service, and sweep chambers and scour floors, and its effulgent
daybeams cannot be muffled or hid, but to sweep and scour will
instantly appear supreme and beautiful actions, the top and radiance
of human life, and all people will get mops and brooms; until, lo!
suddenly the great soul has enshrined itself in some other form, and
done some other deed, and that is now the flower and head of all
living nature.

        We are the photometers, we the irritable goldleaf and tinfoil
that measure the accumulations of the subtle element.  We know the
authentic effects of the true fire through every one of its million
disguises.

        LOVE
 
        "I was as a gem concealed;
        Me my burning ray revealed."
        _Koran_

 
 
        ESSAY V _Love_
 
        Every promise of the soul has innumerable fulfilments; each
ofnt.  Nature, uncontainable, flowing, forelooking, in the first
sentiment of kindness anticipates already a benevolence which shall
lose all particular regards in its general light.  The introduction
to this felicity is in a private and tender relation of one to one,
which is the enchantment of human life; which, like a certain divine
rage and enthusiasm, seizes on man at one period, and works a
revolution in his mind and body; unites him to his race, pledges him
to the domestic and civic relations, carries him with new sympathy
into nature, enhances the power of the senses, opens the imagination,
adds to his character heroic and sacred attributes, establishes
marriage, and gives permanence to human society.

        The natural association of the sentiment of love with the
heyday of the blood seems to require, that in order to portray it in
vivid tints, which every youth and maid should confess to be true to
their throbbing experience, one must not be too old.  The delicious
fancies of youth reject the least savour of a mature philosophy, as
chilling with age and pedantry their purple bloom.  And, therefore, I
know I incur the imputation of unnecessary hardness and stoicism from
those who compose the Court and Parliament of Love.  But from these
formidable censors I shall appeal to my seniors.  For it is to be
considered that this passion of which we speak, though it begin with
the young, yet forsakes not the old, or rather suffers no one who is
truly its servant to grow old, but makes the aged participators of
it, not less than the tender maiden, though in a different and nobler
sort.  For it is a fire that, kindling its first embers in the narrow
nook of a private bosom, caught from a wandering spark out of another
private heart, glows and enlarges until it warms and beams upon
multitudes of men and women, upon the universal heart of all, and so
lights up the whole world and all nature with its generous flames.
It matters not, therefore, whether we attempt to describe the passion
at twenty, at thirty, or at eighty years.  He who paints it at the
first period will lose some of its later, he who paints it at the
last, some of its earlier traits.  Only it is to be hoped that, by
patience and the Muses' aid, we may attain to that inward view of the
law, which shall describe a truth ever young and beautiful, so
central that it shall commend itself to the eye, at whatever angle
beholden.

        And the first condition is, that we must leave a too close and
lingering adherence to facts, and study the sentiment as it appeared
in hope and not in history.  For each man sees his own life defaced
and disfigured, as the life of man is not, to his imagination.  Each
man sees over his own experience a certain stain of error, whilst
that of other men looks fair and ideal.  Let any man go back to those
delicious relations which make the beauty of his life, which have
given him sincerest instruction and nourishment, he will shrink and
moan.  Alas!  I know not why, but infinite compunctions embitter in
mature life the remembrances of budding joy, and cover every beloved
name.  Every thing is beautiful seen from the point of the intellect,
or as truth.  But all is sour, if seen as experience.  Details are
melancholy; the plan is seemly and noble.  In the actual world -- the
painful kingdom of time and place -- dwell care, and canker, and
fear.  With thought, with the ideal, is immortal hilarity, the rose
of joy.  Round it all the Muses sing.  But grief cleaves to names,
and persons, and the partial interests of to-day and yesterday.

        The strong bent of nature is seen in the proportion which this
topic of personal relations usurps in the conversation of society.
What do we wish to know of any worthy person so much, as how he has
sped in the history of this sentiment?  What books in the circulating
libraries circulate?  How we glow over these novels of passion, when
the story is told with any spark of truth and nature!  And what
fastens attention, in the intercourse of life, like any passage
betraying affection between two parties?  Perhaps we never saw them
before, and never shall meet them again.  But we see them exchange a
glance, or betray a deep emotion, and we are no longer strangers.  We
understand them, and take the warmest interest in the development of
the romance.  All mankind love a lover.  The earliest demonstrations
of complacency and kindness are nature's most winning pictures.  It
is the dawn of civility and grace in the coarse and rustic.  The rude
village boy teases the girls about the school-house door; -- but
to-day he comes running into the entry, and meets one fair child
disposing her satchel; he holds her books to help her, and instantly
it seems to him as if she removed herself from him infinitely, and
was a sacred precinct.  Among the throng of girls he runs rudely
enough, but one alone distances him; and these two little neighbours,
that were so close just now, have learned to respect each other's
personality.  Or who can avert his eyes from the engaging,
half-artful, half-artless ways of school-girls who go into the
country shops to buy a skein of silk or a sheet of paper, and talk
half an hour about nothing with the broad-faced, good-natured
shop-boy.  In the village they are on a perfect equality, which love
delights in, and without any coquetry the happy, affectionate nature
of woman flows out in this pretty gossip.  The girls may have little
beauty, yet plainly do they establish between them and the good boy
the most agreeable, confiding relations, what with their fun and
their earnest, about Edgar, and Jonas, and Almira, and who was
invited to the party, and who danced at the dancing-school, and when
the singing-school would begin, and other nothings concerning which
the parties cooed.  By and by that boy wants a wife, and very truly
and heartily will he know where to find a sincere and sweet mate,
without any risk such as Milton deplores as incident to scholars and
great men.

        I have been told, that in some public discourses of mine my
reverence for the intellect has made me unjustly cold to the personal
relations.  But now I almost shrink at the remembrance of such
disparaging words.  For persons are love's world, and the coldest
philosopher cannot recount the debt of the young soul wandering here
in nature to the power of love, without being tempted to unsay, as
treasonable to nature, aught derogatory to the social instincts.
For, though the celestial rapture falling out of heaven seizes only
upon those of tender age, and although a beauty overpowering all
analysis or comparison, and putting us quite beside ourselves, we can
seldom see after thirty years, yet the remembrance of these visions
outlasts all other remembrances, and is a wreath of flowers on the
oldest brows.  But here is a strange fact; it may seem to many men,
in revising their experience, that they have no fairer page in their
life's book than the delicious memory of some passages wherein
affection contrived to give a witchcraft surpassing the deep
attraction of its own truth to a parcel of accidental and trivial
circumstances.  In looking backward, they may find that several
things which were not the charm have more reality to this groping
memory than the charm itself which embalmed them.  But be our
experience in particulars what it may, no man ever forgot the
visitations of that power to his heart and brain, which created all
things new; which was the dawn in him of music, poetry, and art;
which made the face of nature radiant with purple light, the morning
and the night varied enchantments; when a single tone of one voice
could make the heart bound, and the most trivial circumstance
associated with one form is put in the amber of memory; when he
became all eye when one was present, and all memory when one was
gone; when the youth becomes a watcher of windows, and studious of a
glove, a veil, a ribbon, or the wheels of a carriage; when no place
is too solitary, and none too silent, for him who has richer company
and sweeter conversation in his new thoughts, than any old friends,
though best and purest, can give him; for the figures, the motions,
the words of the beloved object are not like other images written in
water, but, as Plutarch said, "enamelled in fire," and make the study
of midnight.
 
        "Thou art not gone being gone, where'er thou art,
        Thou leav'st in him thy watchful eyes, in him thy loving
heart."

        In the noon and the afternoon of life we still throb at the
recollection of days when happiness was not happy enough, but must be
drugged with the relish of pain and fear; for he touched the secret
of the matter, who said of love, --
 
        "All other pleasures are not worth its pains";
 
        and when the day was not long enough, but the night, too, must
be consumed in keen recollections; when the head boiled all night on
the pillow with the generous deed it resolved on; when the moonlight
was a pleasing fever, and the stars were letters, and the flowers
ciphers, and the air was coined into song; when all business seemed
an impertinence, and all the men and women running to and fro in the
streets, mere pictures.

        The passion rebuilds the world for the youth.  It makes all
things alive and significant.  Nature grows conscious.  Every bird on
the boughs of the tree sings now to his heart and soul.  The notes
are almost articulate.  The clouds have faces as he looks on them.
The trees of the forest, the waving grass, and the peeping flowers
have grown intelligent; and he almost fears to trust them with the
secret which they seem to invite.  Yet nature soothes and
sympathizes.  In the green solitude he finds a dearer home than with
men.

        "Fountain-heads and pathless groves,
        Places which pale passion loves,
        Moonlight walks, when all the fowls
        Are safely housed, save bats and owls,
        A midnight bell, a passing groan, --
        These are the sounds we feed upon."

        Behold there in the wood the fine madman!  He is a palace of
sweet sounds and sights; he dilates; he is twice a man; he walks with
arms akimbo; he soliloquizes; he accosts the grass and the trees; he
feels the blood of the violet, the clover, and the lily in his veins;
and he talks with the brook that wets his foot.

        The heats that have opened his perceptions of natural beauty
have made him love music and verse.  It is a fact often observed,
that men have written good verses under the inspiration of passion,
who cannot write well under any other circumstances.

        The like force has the passion over all his nature.  It expands
the sentiment; it makes the clown gentle, and gives the coward heart.
Into the most pitiful and abject it will infuse a heart and courage
to defy the world, so only it have the countenance of the beloved
object.  In giving him to another, it still more gives him to
himself.  He is a new man, with new perceptions, new and keener
purposes, and a religious solemnity of character and aims.  He does
not longer appertain to his family and society; _he_ is somewhat;
_he_ is a person; _he_ is a soul.

 
        And here let us examine a little nearer the nature of that
influence which is thus potent over the human youth.  Beauty, whose
revelation to man we now celebrate, welcome as the sun wherever it
pleases to shine, which pleases everybody with it and with
themselves, seems sufficient to itself.  The lover cannot paint his
maiden to his fancy poor and solitary.  Like a tree in flower, so
much soft, budding, informing love-liness is society for itself, and
she teaches his eye why Beauty was pictured with Loves and Graces
attending her steps.  Her existence makes the world rich.  Though she
extrudes all other persons from his attention as cheap and unworthy,
she indemnifies him by carrying out her own being into somewhat
impersonal, large, mundane, so that the maiden stands to him for a
representative of all select things and virtues.  For that reason,
the lover never sees personal resemblances in his mistress to her
kindred or to others.  His friends find in her a likeness to her
mother, or her sisters, or to persons not of her blood.  The lover
sees no resemblance except to summer evenings and diamond mornings,
to rainbows and the song of birds.

        The ancients called beauty the flowering of virtue.  Who can
analyze the nameless charm which glances from one and another face
and form?  We are touched with emotions of tenderness and
complacency, but we cannot find whereat this dainty emotion, this
wandering gleam, points.  It is destroyed for the imagination by any
attempt to refer it to organization.  Nor does it point to any
relations of friendship or love known and described in society, but,
as it seems to me, to a quite other and unattainable sphere, to
relations of transcendent delicacy and sweetness, to what roses and
violets hint and fore-show.  We cannot approach beauty.  Its nature
is like opaline doves'-neck lustres, hovering and evanescent.  Herein
it resembles the most excellent things, which all have this rainbow
character, defying all attempts at appropriation and use.  What else
did Jean Paul Richter signify, when he said to music, "Away! away!
thou speakest to me of things which in all my endless life I have not
found, and shall not find." The same fluency may be observed in every
work of the plastic arts.  The statue is then beautiful when it
begins to be incomprehensible, when it is passing out of criticism,
and can no longer be defined by compass and measuring-wand, but
demands an active imagination to go with it, and to say what it is in
the act of doing.  The god or hero of the sculptor is always
represented in a transition _from_ that which is representable to the
senses, _to_ that which is not.  Then first it ceases to be a stone.
The same remark holds of painting.  And of poetry, the success is not
attained when it lulls and satisfies, but when it astonishes and
fires us with new endeavours after the unattainable.  Concerning it,
Landor inquires "whether it is not to be referred to some purer state
of sensation and existence."

        In like manner, personal beauty is then first charming and
itself, when it dissatisfies us with any end; when it becomes a story
without an end; when it suggests gleams and visions, and not earthly
satisfactions; when it makes the beholder feel his unworthiness; when
he cannot feel his right to it, though he were Caesar; he cannot feel
more right to it than to the firmament and the splendors of a sunset.

        Hence arose the saying, "If I love you, what is that to you?"
We say so, because we feel that what we love is not in your will, but
above it.  It is not you, but your radiance.  It is that which you
know not in yourself, and can never know.

        This agrees well with that high philosophy of Beauty which the
ancient writers delighted in; for they said that the soul of man,
embodied here on earth, went roaming up and down in quest of that
other world of its own, out of which it came into this, but was soon
stupefied by the light of the natural sun, and unable to see any
other objects than those of this world, which are but shadows of real
things.  Therefore, the Deity sends the glory of youth before the
soul, that it may avail itself of beautiful bodies as aids to its
recollection of the celestial good and fair; and the man beholding
such a person in the female sex runs to her, and finds the highest
joy in contemplating the form, movement, and intelligence of this
person, because it suggests to him the presence of that which indeed
is within the beauty, and the cause of the beauty.

        If, however, from too much conversing with material objects,
the soul was gross, and misplaced its satisfaction in the body, it
reaped nothing but sorrow; body being unable to fulfil the promise
which beauty holds out; but if, accepting the hint of these visions
and suggestions which beauty makes to his mind, the soul passes
through the body, and falls to admire strokes of character, and the
lovers contemplate one another in their discourses and their actions,
then they pass to the true palace of beauty, more and more inflame
their love of it, and by this love extinguishing the base affection,
as the sun puts out the fire by shining on the hearth, they become
pure and hallowed.  By conversation with that which is in itself
excellent, magnanimous, lowly, and just, the lover comes to a warmer
love of these nobilities, and a quicker apprehension of them.  Then
he passes from loving them in one to loving them in all, and so is
the one beautiful soul only the door through which he enters to the
society of all true and pure souls.  In the particular society of his
mate, he attains a clearer sight of any spot, any taint, which her
beauty has contracted from this world, and is able to point it out,
and this with mutual joy that they are now able, without offence, to
indicate blemishes and hindrances in each other, and give to each all
help and comfort in curing the same.  And, beholding in many souls
the traits of the divine beauty, and separating in each soul that
which is divine from the taint which it has contracted in the world,
the lover ascends to the highest beauty, to the love and knowledge of
the Divinity, by steps on this ladder of created souls.

        Somewhat like this have the truly wise told us of love in all
ages.  The doctrine is not old, nor is it new.  If Plato, Plutarch,
and Apuleius taught it, so have Petrarch, Angelo, and Milton.  It
awaits a truer unfolding in opposition and rebuke to that
subterranean prudence which presides at marriages with words that
take hold of the upper world, whilst one eye is prowling in the
cellar, so that its gravest discourse has a savor of hams and
powdering-tubs.  Worst, when this sensualism intrudes into the
education of young women, and withers the hope and affection of human
nature, by teaching that marriage signifies nothing but a housewife's
thrift, and that woman's life has no other aim.

        But this dream of love, though beautiful, is only one scene in
our play.  In the procession of the soul from within outward, it
enlarges its circles ever, like the pebble thrown into the pond, or
the light proceeding from an orb.  The rays of the soul alight first
on things nearest, on every utensil and toy, on nurses and domestics,
on the house, and yard, and passengers, on the circle of household
acquaintance, on politics, and geography, and history.  But things
are ever grouping themselves according to higher or more interior
laws.  Neighbourhood, size, numbers, habits, persons, lose by degrees
their power over us.  Cause and effect, real affinities, the longing
for harmony between the soul and the circumstance, the progressive,
idealizing instinct, predominate later, and the step backward from
the higher to the lower relations is impossible.  Thus even love,
which is the deification of persons, must become more impersonal
every day.  Of this at first it gives no hint.  Little think the
youth and maiden who are glancing at each other across crowded rooms,
with eyes so full of mutual intelligence, of the precious fruit long
hereafter to proceed from this new, quite external stimulus.  The
work of vegetation begins first in the irritability of the bark and
leaf-buds.  From exchanging glances, they advance to acts of
courtesy, of gallantry, then to fiery passion, to plighting troth,
and marriage.  Passion beholds its object as a perfect unit.  The
soul is wholly embodied, and the body is wholly ensouled.

                 "Her pure and eloquent blood
                 Spoke in her cheeks, and so distinctly wrought,
                 That one might almost say her body thought."

         Romeo, if dead, should be cut up into little stars to make
the heavens fine.  Life, with this pair, has no other aim, asks no
more, than Juliet, -- than Romeo.  Night, day, studies, talents,
kingdoms, religion, are all contained in this form full of soul, in
this soul which is all form.  The lovers delight in endearments, in
avowals of love, in comparisons of their regards.  When alone, they
solace themselves with the remembered image of the other.  Does that
other see the same star, the same melting cloud, read the same book,
feel the same emotion, that now delight me?  They try and weigh their
affection, and, adding up costly advantages, friends, opportunities,
properties, exult in discovering that willingly, joyfully, they would
give all as a ransom for the beautiful, the beloved head, not one
hair of which shall be harmed.  But the lot of humanity is on these
children.  Danger, sorrow, and pain arrive to them, as to all.  Love
prays.  It makes covenants with Eternal Power in behalf of this dear
mate.  The union which is thus effected, and which adds a new value
to every atom in nature, for it transmutes every thread throughout
the whole web of relation into a golden ray, and bathes the soul in a
new and sweeter element, is yet a temporary state.  Not always can
flowers, pearls, poetry, protestations, nor even home in another
heart, content the awful soul that dwells in clay.  It arouses itself
at last from these endearments, as toys, and puts on the harness, and
aspires to vast and universal aims.  The soul which is in the soul of
each, craving a perfect beatitude, detects incongruities, defects,
and disproportion in the behaviour of the other.  Hence arise
surprise, expostulation, and pain.  Yet that which drew them to each
other was signs of loveliness, signs of virtue; and these virtues are
there, however eclipsed.  They appear and reappear, and continue to
attract; but the regard changes, quits the sign, and attaches to the
substance.  This repairs the wounded affection.  Meantime, as life
wears on, it proves a game of permutation and combination of all
possible positions of the parties, to employ all the resources of
each, and acquaint each with the strength and weakness of the other.
For it is the nature and end of this relation, that they should
represent the human race to each other.  All that is in the world,
which is or ought to be known, is cunningly wrought into the texture
of man, of woman.

        "The person love does to us fit,
        Like manna, has the taste of all in it."
 
        The world rolls; the circumstances vary every hour.  The angels
that inhabit this temple of the body appear at the windows, and the
gnomes and vices also.  By all the virtues they are united.  If there
be virtue, all the vices are known as such; they confess and flee.
Their once flaming regard is sobered by time in either breast, and,
losing in violence what it gains in extent, it becomes a thorough
good understanding.  They resign each other, without complaint, to
the good offices which man and woman are severally appointed to
discharge in time, and exchange the passion which once could not lose
sight of its object, for a cheerful, disengaged furtherance, whether
present or absent, of each other's designs.  At last they discover
that all which at first drew them together,---- those once sacred
features, that magical play of charms, -- was deciduous, had a
prospective end, like the scaffolding by which the house was built;
and the purification of the intellect and the heart, from year to
year, is the real marriage, foreseen and prepared from the first, and
wholly above their consciousness.  Looking at these aims with which
two persons, a man and a woman, so variously and correlatively
gifted, are shut up in one house to spend in the nuptial society
forty or fifty years, I do not wonder at the emphasis with which the
heart prophesies this crisis from early infancy, at the profuse
beauty with which the instincts deck the nuptial bower, and nature,
and intellect, and art emulate each other in the gifts and the melody
they bring to the epithalamium.

        Thus are we put in training for a love which knows not sex, nor
person, nor partiality, but which seeks virtue and wisdom everywhere,
to the end of increasing virtue and wisdom.  We are by nature
observers, and thereby learners.  That is our permanent state.  But
we are often made to feel that our affections are but tents of a
night.  Though slowly and with pain, the objects of the affections
change, as the objects of thought do.  There are moments when the
affections rule and absorb the man, and make his happiness dependent
on a person or persons.  But in health the mind is presently seen
again, -- its overarching vault, bright with galaxies of immutable
lights, and the warm loves and fears that swept over us as clouds,
must lose their finite character and blend with God, to attain their
own perfection.  But we need not fear that we can lose any thing by
the progress of the soul.  The soul may be trusted to the end.  That
which is so beautiful and attractive as these relations must be
succeeded and supplanted only by what is more beautiful, and so on
for ever.

 
 
        FRIENDSHIP
 
 
        A ruddy drop of manly blood
        The surging sea outweighs,
        The world uncertain comes and goes,
        The lover rooted stays.
        I fancied he was fled,
        And, after many a year,
        Glowed unexhausted kindliness
        Like daily sunrise there.
        My careful heart was free again, --
        O friend, my bosom said,
        Through thee alone the sky is arched,
        Through thee the rose is red,
        All things through thee take nobler form,
        And look beyond the earth,
        And is the mill-round of our fate
        A sun-path in thy worth.
        Me too thy nobleness has taught
        To master my despair;
        The fountains of my hidden life
        Are through thy friendship fair.

 
 
        ESSAY VI _Friendship_

        We have a great selfishness that chills like east winds the
world, the whole human family is bathed with an element of love like
a fine ether.  How many persons we meet in houses, whom we scarcely
speak to, whom yet we honor, and who honor us!  How many we see in
the street, or sit with in church, whom, though silently, we warmly
rejoice to be with!  Read the language of these wandering eye-beams.
The heart knoweth.

        The effect of the indulgence of this human affection is a
certain cordial exhilaration.  In poetry, and in common speech, the
emotions of benevolence and complacency which are felt towards others
are likened to the material effects of fire; so swift, or much more
swift, more active, more cheering, are these fine inward
irradiations.  From the highest degree of passionate love, to the
lowest degree of good-will, they make the sweetness of life.

        Our intellectual and active powers increase with our affection.
The scholar sits down to write, and all his years of meditation do
not furnish him with one good thought or happy expression; but it is
necessary to write a letter to a friend, -- and, forthwith, troops of
gentle thoughts invest themselves, on every hand, with chosen words.
See, in any house where virtue and self-respect abide, the
palpitation which the approach of a stranger causes.  A commended
stranger is expected and announced, and an uneasiness betwixt
pleasure and pain invades all the hearts of a household.  His arrival
almost brings fear to the good hearts that would welcome him.  The
house is dusted, all things fly into their places, the old coat is
exchanged for the new, and they must get up a dinner if they can.  Of
a commended stranger, only the good report is told by others, only
the good and new is heard by us.  He stands to us for humanity.  He
is what we wish.  Having imagined and invested him, we ask how we
should stand related in conversation and action with such a man, and
are uneasy with fear.  The same idea exalts conversation with him.
We talk better than we are wont.  We have the nimblest fancy, a
richer memory, and our dumb devil has taken leave for the time.  For
long hours we can continue a series of sincere, graceful, rich
communications, drawn from the oldest, secretest experience, so that
they who sit by, of our own kinsfolk and acquaintance, shall feel a
lively surprise at our unusual powers.  But as soon as the stranger
begins to intrude his partialities, his definitions, his defects,
into the conversation, it is all over.  He has heard the first, the
last and best he will ever hear from us.  He is no stranger now.
Vulgarity, ignorance, misapprehension are old acquaintances.  Now,
when he comes, he may get the order, the dress, and the dinner, --
but the throbbing of the heart, and the communications of the soul,
no more.

        What is so pleasant as these jets of affection which make a
young world for me again?  What so delicious as a just and firm
encounter of two, in a thought, in a feeling?  How beautiful, on
their approach to this beating heart, the steps and forms of the
gifted and the true!  The moment we indulge our affections, the earth
is metamorphosed; there is no winter, and no night; all tragedies,
all ennuis, vanish, -- all duties even; nothing fills the proceeding
eternity but the forms all radiant of beloved persons.  Let the soul
be assured that somewhere in the universe it should rejoin its
friend, and it would be content and cheerful alone for a thousand
years.

        I awoke this morning with devout thanksgiving for my friends,
the old and the new.  Shall I not call God the Beautiful, who daily
showeth himself so to me in his gifts?  I chide society, I embrace
solitude, and yet I am not so ungrateful as not to see the wise, the
lovely, and the noble-minded, as from time to time they pass my gate.
Who hears me, who understands me, becomes mine, -- a possession for
all time.  Nor is nature so poor but she gives me this joy several
times, and thus we weave social threads of our own, a new web of
relations; and, as many thoughts in succession substantiate
themselves, we shall by and by stand in a new world of our own
creation, and no longer strangers and pilgrims in a traditionary
globe.  My friends have come to me unsought.  The great God gave them
to me.  By oldest right, by the divine affinity of virtue with
itself, I find them, or rather not I, but the Deity in me and in them
derides and cancels the thick walls of individual character,
relation, age, sex, circumstance, at which he usually connives, and
now makes many one.  High thanks I owe you, excellent lovers, who
carry out the world for me to new and noble depths, and enlarge the
meaning of all my thoughts.  These are new poetry of the first Bard,
-- poetry without stop, -- hymn, ode, and epic, poetry still flowing,
Apollo and the Muses chanting still.  Will these, too, separate
themselves from me again, or some of them?  I know not, but I fear it
not; for my relation to them is so pure, that we hold by simple
affinity, and the Genius of my life being thus social, the same
affinity will exert its energy on whomsoever is as noble as these men
and women, wherever I may be.

        I confess to an extreme tenderness of nature on this point.  It
is almost dangerous to me to "crush the sweet poison of misused wine"
of the affections.  A new person is to me a great event, and hinders
me from sleep.  I have often had fine fancies about persons which
have given me delicious hours; but the joy ends in the day; it yields
no fruit.  Thought is not born of it; my action is very little
modified.  I must feel pride in my friend's accomplishments as if
they were mine, -- and a property in his virtues.  I feel as warmly
when he is praised, as the lover when he hears applause of his
engaged maiden.  We over-estimate the conscience of our friend.  His
goodness seems better than our goodness, his nature finer, his
temptations less.  Every thing that is his, -- his name, his form,
his dress, books, and instruments, -- fancy enhances.  Our own
thought sounds new and larger from his mouth.

        Yet the systole and diastole of the heart are not without their
analogy in the ebb and flow of love.  Friendship, like the
immortality of the soul, is too good to be believed.  The lover,
beholding his maiden, half knows that she is not verily that which he
worships; and in the golden hour of friendship, we are surprised with
shades of suspicion and unbelief.  We doubt that we bestow on our
hero the virtues in which he shines, and afterwards worship the form
to which we have ascribed this divine inhabitation.  In strictness,
the soul does not respect men as it respects itself.  In strict
science all persons underlie the same condition of an infinite
remoteness.  Shall we fear to cool our love by mining for the
metaphysical foundation of this Elysian temple?  Shall I not be as
real as the things I see?  If I am, I shall not fear to know them for
what they are.  Their essence is not less beautiful than their
appearance, though it needs finer organs for its apprehension.  The
root of the plant is not unsightly to science, though for chaplets
and festoons we cut the stem short.  And I must hazard the production
of the bald fact amidst these pleasing reveries, though it should
prove an Egyptian skull at our banquet.  A man who stands united with
his thought conceives magnificently of himself.  He is conscious of a
universal success, even though bought by uniform particular failures.
No advantages, no powers, no gold or force, can be any match for him.
I cannot choose but rely on my own poverty more than on your wealth.
I cannot make your consciousness tantamount to mine.  Only the star
dazzles; the planet has a faint, moon-like ray.  I hear what you say
of the admirable parts and tried temper of the party you praise, but
I see well that for all his purple cloaks I shall not like him,
unless he is at last a poor Greek like me.  I cannot deny it, O
friend, that the vast shadow of the Phenomenal includes thee also in
its pied and painted immensity, -- thee, also, compared with whom all
else is shadow.  Thou art not Being, as Truth is, as Justice is, --
thou art not my soul, but a picture and effigy of that.  Thou hast
come to me lately, and already thou art seizing thy hat and cloak.
Is it not that the soul puts forth friends as the tree puts forth
leaves, and presently, by the germination of new buds, extrudes the
old leaf?  The law of nature is alternation for evermore.  Each
electrical state superinduces the opposite.  The soul environs itself
with friends, that it may enter into a grander self-acquaintance or
solitude; and it goes alone for a season, that it may exalt its
conversation or society.  This method betrays itself along the whole
history of our personal relations.  The instinct of affection revives
the hope of union with our mates, and the returning sense of
insulation recalls us from the chase.  Thus every man passes his life
in the search after friendship, and if he should record his true
sentiment, he might write a letter like this to each new candidate
for his love.

 
        DEAR FRIEND: --
        If I was sure of thee, sure of thy capacity, sure to match my
mood with thine, I should never think again of trifles in relation to
thy comings and goings.  I am not very wise; my moods are quite
attainable; and I respect thy genius; it is to me as yet unfathomed;
yet dare I not presume in thee a perfect intelligence of me, and so
thou art to me a delicious torment.  Thine ever, or never.

        Yet these uneasy pleasures and fine pains are for curiosity,
and not for life.  They are not to be indulged.  This is to weave
cobweb, and not cloth.  Our friendships hurry to short and poor
conclusions, because we have made them a texture of wine and dreams,
instead of the tough fibre of the human heart.  The laws of
friendship are austere and eternal, of one web with the laws of
nature and of morals.  But we have aimed at a swift and petty
benefit, to suck a sudden sweetness.  We snatch at the slowest fruit
in the whole garden of God, which many summers and many winters must
ripen.  We seek our friend not sacredly, but with an adulterate
passion which would appropriate him to ourselves.  In vain.  We are
armed all over with subtle antagonisms, which, as soon as we meet,
begin to play, and translate all poetry into stale prose.  Almost all
people descend to meet.  All association must be a compromise, and,
what is worst, the very flower and aroma of the flower of each of the
beautiful natures disappears as they approach each other.  What a
perpetual disappointment is actual society, even of the virtuous and
gifted!  After interviews have been compassed with long foresight, we
must be tormented presently by baffled blows, by sudden, unseasonable
apathies, by epilepsies of wit and of animal spirits, in the heyday
of friendship and thought.  Our faculties do not play us true, and
both parties are relieved by solitude.

        I ought to be equal to every relation.  It makes no difference
how many friends I have, and what content I can find in conversing
with each, if there be one to whom I am not equal.  If I have shrunk
unequal from one contest, the joy I find in all the rest becomes mean
and cowardly.  I should hate myself, if then I made my other friends
my asylum.

 
        "The valiant warrior famoused for fight,
        After a hundred victories, once foiled,
        Is from the book of honor razed quite,
        And all the rest forgot for which he toiled."

        Our impatience is thus sharply rebuked.  Bashfulness and apathy
are a tough husk, in which a delicate organization is protected from
premature ripening.  It would be lost if it knew itself before any of
the best souls were yet ripe enough to know and own it.  Respect the
_naturlangsamkeit_ which hardens the ruby in a million years, and
works in duration, in which Alps and Andes come and go as rainbows.
The good spirit of our life has no heaven which is the price of
rashness.  Love, which is the essence of God, is not for levity, but
for the total worth of man.  Let us not have this childish luxury in
our regards, but the austerest worth; let us approach our friend with
an audacious trust in the truth of his heart, in the breadth,
impossible to be overturned, of his foundations.

        The attractions of this subject are not to be resisted, and I
leave, for the time, all account of subordinate social benefit, to
speak of that select and sacred relation which is a kind of absolute,
and which even leaves the language of love suspicious and common, so
much is this purer, and nothing is so much divine.

        I do not wish to treat friendships daintily, but with roughest
courage.  When they are real, they are not glass threads or
frostwork, but the solidest thing we know.  For now, after so many
ages of experience, what do we know of nature, or of ourselves?  Not
one step has man taken toward the solution of the problem of his
destiny.  In one condemnation of folly stand the whole universe of
men.  But the sweet sincerity of joy and peace, which I draw from
this alliance with my brother's soul, is the nut itself, whereof all
nature and all thought is but the husk and shell.  Happy is the house
that shelters a friend!  It might well be built, like a festal bower
or arch, to entertain him a single day.  Happier, if he know the
solemnity of that relation, and honor its law!  He who offers himself
a candidate for that covenant comes up, like an Olympian, to the
great games, where the first-born of the world are the competitors.
He proposes himself for contests where Time, Want, Danger, are in the
lists, and he alone is victor who has truth enough in his
constitution to preserve the delicacy of his beauty from the wear and
tear of all these.  The gifts of fortune may be present or absent,
but all the speed in that contest depends on intrinsic nobleness, and
the contempt of trifles.  There are two elements that go to the
composition of friendship, each so sovereign that I can detect no
superiority in either, no reason why either should be first named.
One is Truth.  A friend is a person with whom I may be sincere.
Before him I may think aloud.  I am arrived at last in the presence
of a man so real and equal, that I may drop even those undermost
garments of dissimulation, courtesy, and second thought, which men
never put off, and may deal with him with the simplicity and
wholeness with which one chemical atom meets another.  Sincerity is
the luxury allowed, like diadems and authority, only to the highest
rank, _that_ being permitted to speak truth, as having none above it
to court or conform unto.  Every man alone is sincere.  At the
entrance of a second person, hypocrisy begins.  We parry and fend the
approach of our fellow-man by compliments, by gossip, by amusements,
by affairs.  We cover up our thought from him under a hundred folds.
I knew a man, who, under a certain religious frenzy, cast off this
drapery, and, omitting all compliment and commonplace, spoke to the
conscience of every person he encountered, and that with great
insight and beauty.  At first he was resisted, and all men agreed he
was mad.  But persisting, as indeed he could not help doing, for some
time in this course, he attained to the advantage of bringing every
man of his acquaintance into true relations with him.  No man would
think of speaking falsely with him, or of putting him off with any
chat of markets or reading-rooms.  But every man was constrained by
so much sincerity to the like plaindealing, and what love of nature,
what poetry, what symbol of truth he had, he did certainly show him.
But to most of us society shows not its face and eye, but its side
and its back.  To stand in true relations with men in a false age is
worth a fit of insanity, is it not?  We can seldom go erect.  Almost
every man we meet requires some civility, -- requires to be humored;
he has some fame, some talent, some whim of religion or philanthropy
in his head that is not to be questioned, and which spoils all
conversation with him.  But a friend is a sane man who exercises not
my ingenuity, but me.  My friend gives me entertainment without
requiring any stipulation on my part.  A friend, therefore, is a sort
of paradox in nature.  I who alone am, I who see nothing in nature
whose existence I can affirm with equal evidence to my own, behold
now the semblance of my being, in all its height, variety, and
curiosity, reiterated in a foreign form; so that a friend may well be
reckoned the masterpiece of nature.

        The other element of friendship is tenderness.  We are holden
to men by every sort of tie, by blood, by pride, by fear, by hope, by
lucre, by lust, by hate, by admiration, by every circumstance and
badge and trifle, but we can scarce believe that so much character
can subsist in another as to draw us by love.  Can another be so
blessed, and we so pure, that we can offer him tenderness?  When a
man becomes dear to me, I have touched the goal of fortune.  I find
very little written directly to the heart of this matter in books.
And yet I have one text which I cannot choose but remember.  My
author says, -- "I offer myself faintly and bluntly to those whose I
effectually am, and tender myself least to him to whom I am the most
devoted." I wish that friendship should have feet, as well as eyes
and eloquence.  It must plant itself on the ground, before it vaults
over the moon.  I wish it to be a little of a citizen, before it is
quite a cherub.  We chide the citizen because he makes love a
commodity.  It is an exchange of gifts, of useful loans; it is good
neighbourhood; it watches with the sick; it holds the pall at the
funeral; and quite loses sight of the delicacies and nobility of the
relation.  But though we cannot find the god under this disguise of a
sutler, yet, on the other hand, we cannot forgive the poet if he
spins his thread too fine, and does not substantiate his romance by
the municipal virtues of justice, punctuality, fidelity, and pity.  I
hate the prostitution of the name of friendship to signify modish and
worldly alliances.  I much prefer the company of ploughboys and
tin-peddlers, to the silken and perfumed amity which celebrates its
days of encounter by a frivolous display, by rides in a curricle, and
dinners at the best taverns.  The end of friendship is a commerce the
most strict and homely that can be joined; more strict than any of
which we have experience.  It is for aid and comfort through all the
relations and passages of life and death.  It is fit for serene days,
and graceful gifts, and country rambles, but also for rough roads and
hard fare, shipwreck, poverty, and persecution.  It keeps company
with the sallies of the wit and the trances of religion.  We are to
dignify to each other the daily needs and offices of man's life, and
embellish it by courage, wisdom, and unity.  It should never fall
into something usual and settled, but should be alert and inventive,
and add rhyme and reason to what was drudgery.

        Friendship may be said to require natures so rare and costly,
each so well tempered and so happily adapted, and withal so
circumstanced, (for even in that particular, a poet says, love
demands that the parties be altogether paired,) that its satisfaction
can very seldom be assured.  It cannot subsist in its perfection, say
some of those who are learned in this warm lore of the heart, betwixt
more than two.  I am not quite so strict in my terms, perhaps because
I have never known so high a fellowship as others.  I please my
imagination more with a circle of godlike men and women variously
related to each other, and between whom subsists a lofty
intelligence.  But I find this law of _one to one_ peremptory for
conversation, which is the practice and consummation of friendship.
Do not mix waters too much.  The best mix as ill as good and bad.
You shall have very useful and cheering discourse at several times
with two several men, but let all three of you come together, and you
shall not have one new and hearty word.  Two may talk and one may
hear, but three cannot take part in a conversation of the most
sincere and searching sort.  In good company there is never such
discourse between two, across the table, as takes place when you
leave them alone.  In good company, the individuals merge their
egotism into a social soul exactly co-extensive with the several
consciousnesses there present.  No partialities of friend to friend,
no fondnesses of brother to sister, of wife to husband, are there
pertinent, but quite otherwise.  Only he may then speak who can sail
on the common thought of the party, and not poorly limited to his
own.  Now this convention, which good sense demands, destroys the
high freedom of great conversation, which requires an absolute
running of two souls into one.

 
        No two men but, being left alone with each other, enter into
simpler relations.  Yet it is affinity that determines _which_ two
shall converse.  Unrelated men give little joy to each other; will
never suspect the latent powers of each.  We talk sometimes of a
great talent for conversation, as if it were a permanent property in
some individuals.  Conversation is an evanescent relation, -- no
more.  A man is reputed to have thought and eloquence; he cannot, for
all that, say a word to his cousin or his uncle.  They accuse his
silence with as much reason as they would blame the insignificance of
a dial in the shade.  In the sun it will mark the hour.  Among those
who enjoy his thought, he will regain his tongue.

        Friendship requires that rare mean betwixt likeness and
unlikeness, that piques each with the presence of power and of
consent in the other party.  Let me be alone to the end of the world,
rather than that my friend should overstep, by a word or a look, his
real sympathy.  I am equally balked by antagonism and by compliance.
Let him not cease an instant to be himself.  The only joy I have in
his being mine, is that the _not mine_ is _mine_.  I hate, where I
looked for a manly furtherance, or at least a manly resistance, to
find a mush of concession.  Better be a nettle in the side of your
friend than his echo.  The condition which high friendship demands is
ability to do without it.  That high office requires great and
sublime parts.  There must be very two, before there can be very one.
Let it be an alliance of two large, formidable natures, mutually
beheld, mutually feared, before yet they recognize the deep identity
which beneath these disparities unites them.

        He only is fit for this society who is magnanimous; who is sure
that greatness and goodness are always economy; who is not swift to
intermeddle with his fortunes.  Let him not intermeddle with this.
Leave to the diamond its ages to grow, nor expect to accelerate the
births of the eternal.  Friendship demands a religious treatment.  We
talk of choosing our friends, but friends are self-elected.
Reverence is a great part of it.  Treat your friend as a spectacle.
Of course he has merits that are not yours, and that you cannot
honor, if you must needs hold him close to your person.  Stand aside;
give those merits room; let them mount and expand.  Are you the
friend of your friend's buttons, or of his thought?  To a great heart
he will still be a stranger in a thousand particulars, that he may
come near in the holiest ground.  Leave it to girls and boys to
regard a friend as property, and to suck a short and all-confounding
pleasure, instead of the noblest benefit.

        Let us buy our entrance to this guild by a long probation.  Why
should we desecrate noble and beautiful souls by intruding on them?
Why insist on rash personal relations with your friend?  Why go to
his house, or know his mother and brother and sisters?  Why be
visited by him at your own?  Are these things material to our
covenant?  Leave this touching and clawing.  Let him be to me a
spirit.  A message, a thought, a sincerity, a glance from him, I
want, but not news, nor pottage.  I can get politics, and chat, and
neighbourly conveniences from cheaper companions.  Should not the
society of my friend be to me poetic, pure, universal, and great as
nature itself?  Ought I to feel that our tie is profane in comparison
with yonder bar of cloud that sleeps on the horizon, or that clump of
waving grass that divides the brook?  Let us not vilify, but raise it
to that standard.  That great, defying eye, that scornful beauty of
his mien and action, do not pique yourself on reducing, but rather
fortify and enhance.  Worship his superiorities; wish him not less by
a thought, but hoard and tell them all.  Guard him as thy
counterpart.  Let him be to thee for ever a sort of beautiful enemy,
untamable, devoutly revered, and not a trivial conveniency to be soon
outgrown and cast aside.  The hues of the opal, the light of the
diamond, are not to be seen, if the eye is too near.  To my friend I
write a letter, and from him I receive a letter.  That seems to you a
little.  It suffices me.  It is a spiritual gift worthy of him to
give, and of me to receive.  It profanes nobody.  In these warm lines
the heart will trust itself, as it will not to the tongue, and pour
out the prophecy of a godlier existence than all the annals of
heroism have yet made good.

        Respect so far the holy laws of this fellowship as not to
prejudice its perfect flower by your impatience for its opening.  We
must be our own before we can be another's.  There is at least this
satisfaction in crime, according to the Latin proverb; -- you can
speak to your accomplice on even terms.  _Crimen quos inquinat,
aequat_.  To those whom we admire and love, at first we cannot.  Yet
the least defect of self-possession vitiates, in my judgment, the
entire relation.  There can never be deep peace between two spirits,
never mutual respect, until, in their dialogue, each stands for the
whole world.

        What is so great as friendship, let us carry with what grandeur
of spirit we can.  Let us be silent, -- so we may hear the whisper of
the gods.  Let us not interfere.  Who set you to cast about what you
should say to the select souls, or how to say any thing to such?  No
matter how ingenious, no matter how graceful and bland.  There are
innumerable degrees of folly and wisdom, and for you to say aught is
to be frivolous.  Wait, and thy heart shall speak.  Wait until the
necessary and everlasting overpowers you, until day and night avail
themselves of your lips.  The only reward of virtue is virtue; the
only way to have a friend is to be one.  You shall not come nearer a
man by getting into his house.  If unlike, his soul only flees the
faster from you, and you shall never catch a true glance of his eye.
We see the noble afar off, and they repel us; why should we intrude?
Late, -- very late, -- we perceive that no arrangements, no
introductions, no consuetudes or habits of society, would be of any
avail to establish us in such relations with them as we desire, --
but solely the uprise of nature in us to the same degree it is in
them; then shall we meet as water with water; and if we should not
meet them then, we shall not want them, for we are already they.  In
the last analysis, love is only the reflection of a man's own
worthiness from other men.  Men have sometimes exchanged names with
their friends, as if they would signify that in their friend each
loved his own soul.

        The higher the style we demand of friendship, of course the
less easy to establish it with flesh and blood.  We walk alone in the
world.  Friends, such as we desire, are dreams and fables.  But a
sublime hope cheers ever the faithful heart, that elsewhere, in other
regions of the universal power, souls are now acting, enduring, and
daring, which can love us, and which we can love.  We may
congratulate ourselves that the period of nonage, of follies, of
blunders, and of shame, is passed in solitude, and when we are
finished men, we shall grasp heroic hands in heroic hands.  Only be
admonished by what you already see, not to strike leagues of
friendship with cheap persons, where no friendship can be.  Our
impatience betrays us into rash and foolish alliances which no God
attends.  By persisting in your path, though you forfeit the little
you gain the great.  You demonstrate yourself, so as to put yourself
out of the reach of false relations, and you draw to you the
first-born of the world, -- those rare pilgrims whereof only one or
two wander in nature at once, and before whom the vulgar great show
as spectres and shadows merely.

        It is foolish to be afraid of making our ties too spiritual, as
if so we could lose any genuine love.  Whatever correction of our
popular views we make from insight, nature will be sure to bear us
out in, and though it seem to rob us of some joy, will repay us with
a greater.  Let us feel, if we will, the absolute insulation of man.
We are sure that we have all in us.  We go to Europe, or we pursue
persons, or we read books, in the instinctive faith that these will
call it out and reveal us to ourselves.  Beggars all.  The persons
are such as we; the Europe an old faded garment of dead persons; the
books their ghosts.  Let us drop this idolatry.  Let us give over
this mendicancy.  Let us even bid our dearest friends farewell, and
defy them, saying, `Who are you?  Unhand me: I will be dependent no
more.' Ah! seest thou not, O brother, that thus we part only to meet
again on a higher platform, and only be more each other's, because we
are more our own?  A friend is Janus-faced: he looks to the past and
the future.  He is the child of all my foregoing hours, the prophet
of those to come, and the harbinger of a greater friend.

        I do then with my friends as I do with my books.  I would have
them where I can find them, but I seldom use them.  We must have
society on our own terms, and admit or exclude it on the slightest
cause.  I cannot afford to speak much with my friend.  If he is
great, he makes me so great that I cannot descend to converse.  In
the great days, presentiments hover before me in the firmament.  I
ought then to dedicate myself to them.  I go in that I may seize
them, I go out that I may seize them.  I fear only that I may lose
them receding into the sky in which now they are only a patch of
brighter light.  Then, though I prize my friends, I cannot afford to
talk with them and study their visions, lest I lose my own.  It would
indeed give me a certain household joy to quit this lofty seeking,
this spiritual astronomy, or search of stars, and come down to warm
sympathies with you; but then I know well I shall mourn always the
vanishing of my mighty gods.  It is true, next week I shall have
languid moods, when I can well afford to occupy myself with foreign
objects; then I shall regret the lost literature of your mind, and
wish you were by my side again.  But if you come, perhaps you will
fill my mind only with new visions, not with yourself but with your
lustres, and I shall not be able any more than now to converse with
you.  So I will owe to my friends this evanescent intercourse.  I
will receive from them, not what they have, but what they are.  They
shall give me that which properly they cannot give, but which
emanates from them.  But they shall not hold me by any relations less
subtile and pure.  We will meet as though we met not, and part as
though we parted not.

        It has seemed to me lately more possible than I knew, to carry
a friendship greatly, on one side, without due correspondence on the
other.  Why should I cumber myself with regrets that the receiver is
not capacious?  It never troubles the sun that some of his rays fall
wide and vain into ungrateful space, and only a small part on the
reflecting planet.  Let your greatness educate the crude and cold
companion.  If he is unequal, he will presently pass away; but thou
art enlarged by thy own shining, and, no longer a mate for frogs and
worms, dost soar and burn with the gods of the empyrean.  It is
thought a disgrace to love unrequited.  But the great will see that
true love cannot be unrequited.  True love transcends the unworthy
object, and dwells and broods on the eternal, and when the poor
interposed mask crumbles, it is not sad, but feels rid of so much
earth, and feels its independency the surer.  Yet these things may
hardly be said without a sort of treachery to the relation.  The
essence of friendship is entireness, a total magnanimity and trust.
It must not surmise or provide for infirmity.  It treats its object
as a god, that it may deify both.

 
 
        PRUDENCE
 
 
        Theme no poet gladly sung,
        Fair to old and foul to young,
        Scorn not thou the love of parts,
        And the articles of arts.
        Grandeur of the perfect sphere
        Thanks the atoms that cohere.
 
 

        ESSAY VII _Prudence_

        What right have I to write ont of the negative sort?  My
prudence consists in avoiding and going without, not in the inventing
of means and methods, not in adroit steering, not in gentle
repairing.  I have no skill to make money spend well, no genius in my
economy, and whoever sees my garden discovers that I must have some
other garden.  Yet I love facts, and hate lubricity, and people
without perception.  Then I have the same title to write on prudence,
that I have to write on poetry or holiness.  We write from aspiration
and antagonism, as well as from experience.  We paint those qualities
which we do not possess.  The poet admires the man of energy and
tactics; the merchant breeds his son for the church or the bar: and
where a man is not vain and egotistic, you shall find what he has not
by his praise.  Moreover, it would be hardly honest in me not to
balance these fine lyric words of Love and Friendship with words of
coarser sound, and, whilst my debt to my senses is real and constant,
not to own it in passing.

        Prudence is the virtue of the senses.  It is the science of
appearances.  It is the outmost action of the inward life.  It is God
taking thought for oxen.  It moves matter after the laws of matter.
It is content to seek health of body by complying with physical
conditions, and health of mind by the laws of the intellect.

        The world of the senses is a world of shows; it does not exist
for itself, but has a symbolic character; and a true prudence or law
of shows recognizes the copresence of other laws, and knows that its
own office is subaltern; knows that it is surface and not centre
where it works.  Prudence is false when detached.  It is legitimate
when it is the Natural History of the soul incarnate; when it unfolds
the beauty of laws within the narrow scope of the senses.

        There are all degrees of proficiency in knowledge of the world.
It is sufficient, to our present purpose, to indicate three.  One
class live to the utility of the symbol; esteeming health and wealth
a final good.  Another class live above this mark to the beauty of
the symbol; as the poet, and artist, and the naturalist, and man of
science.  A third class live above the beauty of the symbol to the
beauty of the thing signified; these are wise men.  The first class
have common sense; the second, taste; and the third, spiritual
perception.  Once in a long time, a man traverses the whole scale,
and sees and enjoys the symbol solidly; then also has a clear eye for
its beauty, and, lastly, whilst he pitches his tent on this sacred
volcanic isle of nature, does not offer to build houses and barns
thereon, reverencing the splendor of the God which he sees bursting
through each chink and cranny.

        The world is filled with the proverbs and acts and winkings of
a base prudence, which is a devotion to matter, as if we possessed no
other faculties than the palate, the nose, the touch, the eye and
ear; a prudence which adores the Rule of Three, which never
subscribes, which never gives, which seldom lends, and asks but one
question of any project, -- Will it bake bread?  This is a disease
like a thickening of the skin until the vital organs are destroyed.
But culture, revealing the high origin of the apparent world, and
aiming at the perfection of the man as the end, degrades every thing
else, as health and bodily life, into means.  It sees prudence not to
be a several faculty, but a name for wisdom and virtue conversing
with the body and its wants.  Cultivated men always feel and speak
so, as if a great fortune, the achievement of a civil or social
measure, great personal influence, a graceful and commanding address,
had their value as proofs of the energy of the spirit.  If a man lose
his balance, and immerse himself in any trades or pleasures for their
own sake, he may be a good wheel or pin, but he is not a cultivated
man.

        The spurious prudence, making the senses final, is the god of
sots and cowards, and is the subject of all comedy.  It is nature's
joke, and therefore literature's.  The true prudence limits this
sensualism by admitting the knowledge of an internal and real world.
This recognition once made, -- the order of the world and the
distribution of affairs and times being studied with the
co-perception of their subordinate place, will reward any degree of
attention.  For our existence, thus apparently attached in nature to
the sun and the returning moon and the periods which they mark, -- so
susceptible to climate and to country, so alive to social good and
evil, so fond of splendor, and so tender to hunger and cold and debt,
-- reads all its primary lessons out of these books.

        Prudence does not go behind nature, and ask whence it is.  It
takes the laws of the world, whereby man's being is conditioned, as
they are, and keeps these laws, that it may enjoy their proper good.
It respects space and time, climate, want, sleep, the law of
polarity, growth, and death.  There revolve to give bound and period
to his being, on all sides, the sun and moon, the great formalists in
the sky: here lies stubborn matter, and will not swerve from its
chemical routine.  Here is a planted globe, pierced and belted with
natural laws, and fenced and distributed externally with civil
partitions and properties which impose new restraints on the young
inhabitant.

        We eat of the bread which grows in the field.  We live by the
air which blows around us, and we are poisoned by the air that is too
cold or too hot, too dry or too wet.  Time, which shows so vacant,
indivisible, and divine in its coming, is slit and peddled into
trifles and tatters.  A door is to be painted, a lock to be repaired.
I want wood, or oil, or meal, or salt; the house smokes, or I have a
headache; then the tax; and an affair to be transacted with a man
without heart or brains; and the stinging recollection of an
injurious or very awkward word, -- these eat up the hours.  Do what
we can, summer will have its flies: if we walk in the woods, we must
feed mosquitos: if we go a-fishing, we must expect a wet coat.  Then
climate is a great impediment to idle persons: we often resolve to
give up the care of the weather, but still we regard the clouds and
the rain.

        We are instructed by these petty experiences which usurp the
hours and years.  The hard soil and four months of snow make the
inhabitant of the northern temperate zone wiser and abler than his
fellow who enjoys the fixed smile of the tropics.  The islander may
ramble all day at will.  At night, he may sleep on a mat under the
moon, and wherever a wild date-tree grows, nature has, without a
prayer even, spread a table for his morning meal.  The northerner is
perforce a householder.  He must brew, bake, salt, and preserve his
food, and pile wood and coal.  But as it happens that not one stroke
can labor lay to, without some new acquaintance with nature; and as
nature is inexhaustibly significant, the inhabitants of these
climates have always excelled the southerner in force.  Such is the
value of these matters, that a man who knows other things can never
know too much of these.  Let him have accurate perceptions.  Let him,
if he have hands, handle; if eyes, measure and discriminate; let him
accept and hive every fact of chemistry, natural history, and
economics; the more he has, the less is he willing to spare any one.
Time is always bringing the occasions that disclose their value.
Some wisdom comes out of every natural and innocent action.  The
domestic man, who loves no music so well as his kitchen clock, and
the airs which the logs sing to him as they burn on the hearth, has
solaces which others never dream of.  The application of means to
ends insures victory and the songs of victory, not less in a farm or
a shop than in the tactics of party or of war.  The good husband
finds method as efficient in the packing of fire-wood in a shed, or
in the harvesting of fruits in the cellar, as in Peninsular campaigns
or the files of the Department of State.  In the rainy day, he builds
a work-bench, or gets his tool-box set in the corner of the
barn-chamber, and stored with nails, gimlet, pincers, screwdriver,
and chisel.  Herein he tastes an old joy of youth and childhood, the
cat-like love of garrets, presses, and corn-chambers, and of the
conveniences of long housekeeping.  His garden or his poultry-yard
tells him many pleasant anecdotes.  One might find argument for
optimism in the abundant flow of this saccharine element of pleasure
in every suburb and extremity of the good world.  Let a man keep the
law, -- any law, -- and his way will be strown with satisfactions.
There is more difference in the quality of our pleasures than in the
amount.

        On the other hand, nature punishes any neglect of prudence.  If
you think the senses final, obey their law.  If you believe in the
soul, do not clutch at sensual sweetness before it is ripe on the
slow tree of cause and effect.  It is vinegar to the eyes, to deal
with men of loose and imperfect perception.  Dr.  Johnson is reported
to have said, -- "If the child says he looked out of this window,
when he looked out of that, -- whip him."  Our American character is
marked by a more than average delight in accurate perception, which
is shown by the currency of the byword, "No mistake." But the
discomfort of unpunctuality, of confusion of thought about facts, of
inattention to the wants of to-morrow, is of no nation.  The
beautiful laws of time and space, once dislocated by our inaptitude,
are holes and dens. If the hive be disturbed by rash and stupid
hands, instead of honey, it will yield us bees.  Our words and
actions to be fair must be timely.  A gay and pleasant sound is the
whetting of the scythe in the mornings of June; yet what is more
lonesome and sad than the sound of a whetstone or mower's rifle, when
it is too late in the season to make hay?  Scatter-brained and
"afternoon men" spoil much more than their own affair, in spoiling
the temper of those who deal with them.  I have seen a criticism on
some paintings, of which I am reminded when I see the shiftless and
unhappy men who are not true to their senses.  The last Grand Duke of
Weimar, a man of superior understanding, said: -- "I have sometimes
remarked in the presence of great works of art, and just now
especially, in Dresden, how much a certain property contributes to
the effect which gives life to the figures, and to the life an
irresistible truth.  This property is the hitting, in all the figures
we draw, the right centre of gravity.  I mean, the placing the
figures firm upon their feet, making the hands grasp, and fastening
the eyes on the spot where they should look.  Even lifeless figures,
as vessels and stools, -- let them be drawn ever so correctly, --
lose all effect so soon as they lack the resting upon their centre of
gravity, and have a certain swimming and oscillating appearance.  The
Raphael, in the Dresden gallery, (the only greatly affecting picture
which I have seen,) is the quietest and most passionless piece you
can imagine; a couple of saints who worship the Virgin and Child.
Nevertheless, it awakens a deeper impression than the contortions of
ten crucified martyrs.  For, beside all the resistless beauty of
form, it possesses in the highest degree the property of the
perpendicularity of all the figures." This perpendicularity we demand
of all the figures in this picture of life.  Let them stand on their
feet, and not float and swing.  Let us know where to find them.  Let
them discriminate between what they remember and what they dreamed,
call a spade a spade, give us facts, and honor their own senses with
trust.

        But what man shall dare tax another with imprudence?  Who is
prudent?  The men we call greatest are least in this kingdom.  There
is a certain fatal dislocation in our relation to nature, distorting
our modes of living, and making every law our enemy, which seems at
last to have aroused all the wit and virtue in the world to ponder
the question of Reform.  We must call the highest prudence to
counsel, and ask why health and beauty and genius should now be the
exception, rather than the rule, of human nature?  We do not know the
properties of plants and animals and the laws of nature through our
sympathy with the same; but this remains the dream of poets.  Poetry
and prudence should be coincident.  Poets should be lawgivers; that
is, the boldest lyric inspiration should not chide and insult, but
should announce and lead, the civil code, and the day's work.  But
now the two things seem irreconcilably parted.  We have violated law
upon law, until we stand amidst ruins, and when by chance we espy a
coincidence between reason and the phenomena, we are surprised.
Beauty should be the dowry of every man and woman, as invariably as
sensation; but it is rare.  Health or sound organization should be
universal.  Genius should be the child of genius, and every child
should be inspired; but now it is not to be predicted of any child,
and nowhere is it pure.  We call partial half-lights, by courtesy,
genius; talent which converts itself to money; talent which glitters
to-day, that it may dine and sleep well to-morrow; and society is
officered by _men of parts_, as they are properly called, and not by
divine men.  These use their gifts to refine luxury, not to abolish
it.  Genius is always ascetic; and piety and love.  Appetite shows to
the finer souls as a disease, and they find beauty in rites and
bounds that resist it.

        We have found out fine names to cover our sensuality withal,
but no gifts can raise intemperance.  The man of talent affects to
call his transgressions of the laws of the senses trivial, and to
count them nothing considered with his devotion to his art.  His art
never taught him lewdness, nor the love of wine, nor the wish to reap
where he had not sowed.  His art is less for every deduction from his
holiness, and less for every defect of common sense.  On him who
scorned the world, as he said, the scorned world wreaks its revenge.
He that despiseth small things will perish by little and little.
Goethe's Tasso is very likely to be a pretty fair historical
portrait, and that is true tragedy.  It does not seem to me so
genuine grief when some tyrannous Richard the Third oppresses and
slays a score of innocent persons, as when Antonio and Tasso, both
apparently right, wrong each other.  One living after the maxims of
this world, and consistent and true to them, the other fired with all
divine sentiments, yet grasping also at the pleasures of sense,
without submitting to their law.  That is a grief we all feel, a knot
we cannot untie.  Tasso's is no infrequent case in modern biography.
A man of genius, of an ardent temperament, reckless of physical laws,
self-indulgent, becomes presently unfortunate, querulous, a
"discomfortable cousin," a thorn to himself and to others.

        The scholar shames us by his bifold life.  Whilst something
higher than prudence is active, he is admirable; when common sense is
wanted, he is an encumbrance.  Yesterday, Caesar was not so great;
to-day, the felon at the gallows' foot is not more miserable.
Yesterday, radiant with the light of an ideal world, in which he
lives, the first of men; and now oppressed by wants and by sickness,
for which he must thank himself.  He resembles the pitiful
drivellers, whom travellers describe as frequenting the bazaars of
Constantinople, who skulk about all day, yellow, emaciated, ragged,
sneaking; and at evening, when the bazaars are open, slink to the
opium-shop, swallow their morsel, and become tranquil and glorified
seers.  And who has not seen the tragedy of imprudent genius,
struggling for years with paltry pecuniary difficulties, at last
sinking, chilled, exhausted, and fruitless, like a giant slaughtered
by pins?

        Is it not better that a man should accept the first pains and
mortifications of this sort, which nature is not slack in sending
him, as hints that he must expect no other good than the just fruit
of his own labor and self-denial?  Health, bread, climate, social
position, have their importance, and he will give them their due.
Let him esteem Nature a perpetual counsellor, and her perfections the
exact measure of our deviations.  Let him make the night night, and
the day day.  Let him control the habit of expense.  Let him see that
as much wisdom may be expended on a private economy as on an empire,
and as much wisdom may be drawn from it.  The laws of the world are
written out for him on every piece of money in his hand.  There is
nothing he will not be the better for knowing, were it only the
wisdom of Poor Richard; or the State-Street prudence of buying by the
acre to sell by the foot; or the thrift of the agriculturist, to
stick a tree between whiles, because it will grow whilst he sleeps;
or the prudence which consists in husbanding little strokes of the
tool, little portions of time, particles of stock, and small gains.
The eye of prudence may never shut.  Iron, if kept at the
ironmonger's, will rust; beer, if not brewed in the right state of
the atmosphere, will sour; timber of ships will rot at sea, or, if
laid up high and dry, will strain, warp, and dry-rot; money, if kept
by us, yields no rent, and is liable to loss; if invested, is liable
to depreciation of the particular kind of stock.  Strike, says the
smith, the iron is white; keep the rake, says the haymaker, as nigh
the scythe as you can, and the cart as nigh the rake.  Our Yankee
trade is reputed to be very much on the extreme of this prudence.  It
takes bank-notes, -- good, bad, clean, ragged, -- and saves itself by
the speed with which it passes them off.  Iron cannot rust, nor beer
sour, nor timber rot, nor calicoes go out of fashion, nor money
stocks depreciate, in the few swift moments in which the Yankee
suffers any one of them to remain in his possession.  In skating over
thin ice, our safety is in our speed.

        Let him learn a prudence of a higher strain.  Let him learn
that every thing in nature, even motes and feathers, go by law and
not by luck, and that what he sows he reaps.  By diligence and
self-command, let him put the bread he eats at his own disposal, that
he may not stand in bitter and false relations to other men; for the
best good of wealth is freedom.  Let him practise the minor virtues.
How much of human life is lost in waiting! let him not make his
fellow-creatures wait.  How many words and promises are promises of
conversation! let his be words of fate.  When he sees a folded and
sealed scrap of paper float round the globe in a pine ship, and come
safe to the eye for which it was written, amidst a swarming
population, let him likewise feel the admonition to integrate his
being across all these distracting forces, and keep a slender human
word among the storms, distances, and accidents that drive us hither
and thither, and, by persistency, make the paltry force of one man
reappear to redeem its pledge, after months and years, in the most
distant climates.

        We must not try to write the laws of any one virtue, looking at
that only.  Human nature loves no contradictions, but is symmetrical.
The prudence which secures an outward well-being is not to be studied
by one set of men, whilst heroism and holiness are studied by
another, but they are reconcilable.  Prudence concerns the present
time, persons, property, and existing forms.  But as every fact hath
its roots in the soul, and, if the soul were changed, would cease to
be, or would become some other thing, the proper administration of
outward things will always rest on a just apprehension of their cause
and origin, that is, the good man will be the wise man, and the
single-hearted, the politic man.  Every violation of truth is not
only a sort of suicide in the liar, but is a stab at the health of
human society.  On the most profitable lie, the course of events
presently lays a destructive tax; whilst frankness invites frankness,
puts the parties on a convenient footing, and makes their business a
friendship.  Trust men, and they will be true to you; treat them
greatly, and they will show themselves great, though they make an
exception in your favor to all their rules of trade.

        So, in regard to disagreeable and formidable things, prudence
does not consist in evasion, or in flight, but in courage.  He who
wishes to walk in the most peaceful parts of life with any serenity
must screw himself up to resolution.  Let him front the object of his
worst apprehension, and his stoutness will commonly make his fear
groundless.  The Latin proverb says, that "in battles the eye is
first overcome." Entire self-possession may make a battle very little
more dangerous to life than a match at foils or at football.
Examples are cited by soldiers, of men who have seen the cannon
pointed, and the fire given to it, and who have stepped aside from
the path of the ball.  The terrors of the storm are chiefly confined
to the parlour and the cabin.  The drover, the sailor, buffets it all
day, and his health renews itself at as vigorous a pulse under the
sleet, as under the sun of June.

        In the occurrence of unpleasant things among neighbours, fear
comes readily to heart, and magnifies the consequence of the other
party; but it is a bad counsellor.  Every man is actually weak, and
apparently strong.  To himself, he seems weak; to others, formidable.
You are afraid of Grim; but Grim also is afraid of you.  You are
solicitous of the good-will of the meanest person, uneasy at his
ill-will.  But the sturdiest offender of your peace and of the
neighbourhood, if you rip up _his_ claims, is as thin and timid as
any; and the peace of society is often kept, because, as children
say, one is afraid, and the other dares not.  Far off, men swell,
bully, and threaten; bring them hand to hand, and they are a feeble
folk.

        It is a proverb, that `courtesy costs nothing'; but calculation
might come to value love for its profit.  Love is fabled to be blind;
but kindness is necessary to perception; love is not a hood, but an
eye-water.  If you meet a sectary, or a hostile partisan, never
recognize the dividing lines; but meet on what common ground remains,
-- if only that the sun shines, and the rain rains for both; the area
will widen very fast, and ere you know it the boundary mountains, on
which the eye had fastened, have melted into air.  If they set out to
contend, Saint Paul will lie, and Saint John will hate.  What low,
poor, paltry, hypocritical people an argument on religion will make
of the pure and chosen souls!  They will shuffle, and crow, crook,
and hide, feign to confess here, only that they may brag and conquer
there, and not a thought has enriched either party, and not an
emotion of bravery, modesty, or hope.  So neither should you put
yourself in a false position with your contemporaries, by indulging a
vein of hostility and bitterness.  Though your views are in straight
antagonism to theirs, assume an identity of sentiment, assume that
you are saying precisely that which all think, and in the flow of wit
and love roll out your paradoxes in solid column, with not the
infirmity of a doubt.  So at least shall you get an adequate
deliverance.  The natural motions of the soul are so much better than
the voluntary ones, that you will never do yourself justice in
dispute.  The thought is not then taken hold of by the right handle,
does not show itself proportioned, and in its true bearings, but
bears extorted, hoarse, and half witness.  But assume a consent, and
it shall presently be granted, since, really, and underneath their
external diversities, all men are of one heart and mind.

        Wisdom will never let us stand with any man or men on an
unfriendly footing.  We refuse sympathy and intimacy with people, as
if we waited for some better sympathy and intimacy to come.  But
whence and when?  To-morrow will be like to-day.  Life wastes itself
whilst we are preparing to live.  Our friends and fellow-workers die
off from us.  Scarcely can we say, we see new men, new women,
approaching us.  We are too old to regard fashion, too old to expect
patronage of any greater or more powerful.  Let us suck the sweetness
of those affections and consuetudes that grow near us.  These old
shoes are easy to the feet.  Undoubtedly, we can easily pick faults
in our company, can easily whisper names prouder, and that tickle the
fancy more.  Every man's imagination hath its friends; and life would
be dearer with such companions.  But, if you cannot have them on good
mutual terms, you cannot have them.  If not the Deity, but our
ambition, hews and shapes the new relations, their virtue escapes, as
strawberries lose their flavor in garden-beds.

        Thus truth, frankness, courage, love, humility, and all the
virtues, range themselves on the side of prudence, or the art of
securing a present well-being.  I do not know if all matter will be
found to be made of one element, as oxygen or hydrogen, at last, but
the world of manners and actions is wrought of one stuff, and, begin
where we will, we are pretty sure in a short space to be mumbling our
ten commandments.

 
        HEROISM
 
 
        "Paradise is under the shadow of swords."
        _Mahomet_
 
 
        Ruby wine is drunk by knaves,
        Sugar spends to fatten slaves,
        Rose and vine-leaf deck buffoons;
        Thunderclouds are Jove's festoons,
        Drooping oft in wreaths of dread
        Lightning-knotted round his head;
        The hero is not fed on sweets,
        Daily his own heart he eats;
        Chambers of the great are jails,
        And head-winds right for royal sails.

 
 
        ESSAY VIII _Heroism_

        In the elder English dramaetcher, there is a constant
recognition of gentility, as if a noble behaviour were as easily
marked in the society of their age, as color is in our American
population.  When any Rodrigo, Pedro, or Valerio enters, though he be
a stranger, the duke or governor exclaims, This is a gentleman, --
and proffers civilities without end; but all the rest are slag and
refuse.  In harmony with this delight in personal advantages, there
is in their plays a certain heroic cast of character and dialogue, --
as in Bonduca, Sophocles, the Mad Lover, the Double Marriage, --
wherein the speaker is so earnest and cordial, and on such deep
grounds of character, that the dialogue, on the slightest additional
incident in the plot, rises naturally into poetry.  Among many texts,
take the following.  The Roman Martius has conquered Athens, -- all
but the invincible spirits of Sophocles, the duke of Athens, and
Dorigen, his wife.  The beauty of the latter inflames Martius, and he
seeks to save her husband; but Sophocles will not ask his life,
although assured that a word will save him, and the execution of both
proceeds.

        "_Valerius_.  Bid thy wife farewell.
 
        _Soph_.  No, I will take no leave.  My Dorigen,
        Yonder, above, 'bout Ariadne's crown,
        My spirit shall hover for thee.  Prithee, haste.

        _Dor_.  Stay, Sophocles, -- with this tie up my sight;
        Let not soft nature so transformed be,
        And lose her gentler sexed humanity,
        To make me see my lord bleed.  So, 't is well;
        Never one object underneath the sun
        Will I behold before my Sophocles:
        Farewell; now teach the Romans how to die.

        _Mar_.  Dost know what 't is to die?
 
        _Soph_.  Thou dost not, Martius,
        And, therefore, not what 't is to live; to die
        Is to begin to live.  It is to end |P372|p1
        An old, stale, weary work, and to commence
        A newer and a better.  'T is to leave
        Deceitful knaves for the society
        Of gods and goodness.  Thou thyself must part
        At last from all thy garlands, pleasures, triumphs,
        And prove thy fortitude what then 't will do.

        _Val_.  But art not grieved nor vexed to leave thy life thus?
 
        _Soph_.  Why should I grieve or vex for being sent
        To them I ever loved best?  Now I'll kneel,
        But with my back toward thee; 't is the last duty
        This trunk can do the gods.

        _Mar_.  Strike, strike, Valerius,
        Or Martius' heart will leap out at his mouth:
        This is a man, a woman!  Kiss thy lord,
        And live with all the freedom you were wont.
        O love! thou doubly hast afflicted me
        With virtue and with beauty.  Treacherous heart,
        My hand shall cast thee quick into my urn,
        Ere thou transgress this knot of piety.

        _Val_.  What ails my brother?
 
        _Soph_.  Martius, O Martius,
        Thou now hast found a way to conquer me.

        _Dor_.  O star of Rome! what gratitude can speak
        Fit words to follow such a deed as this?

        _Mar_.  This admirable duke, Valerius,
        With his disdain of fortune and of death,
        Captived himself, has captivated me,
        And though my arm hath ta'en his body here,
        His soul hath subjugated Martius' soul.
        By Romulus, he is all soul, I think;
        He hath no flesh, and spirit cannot be gyved;
        Then we have vanquished nothing; he is free,
        And Martius walks now in captivity."
 
        I do not readily remember any poem, play, sermon, novel, or
oration, that our press vents in the last few years, which goes to
the same tune.  We have a great many flutes and flageolets, but not
often the sound of any fife.  Yet, Wordsworth's Laodamia, and the ode
of "Dion," and some sonnets, have a certain noble music; and Scott
will sometimes draw a stroke like the protrait of Lord Evandale,
given by Balfour of Burley.  Thomas Carlyle, with his natural taste
for what is manly and daring in character, has suffered no heroic
trait in his favorites to drop from his biographical and historical
pictures.  Earlier, Robert Burns has given us a song or two.  In the
Harleian Miscellanies, there is an account of the battle of Lutzen,
which deserves to be read.  And Simon Ockley's History of the
Saracens recounts the prodigies of individual valor with admiration,
all the more evident on the part of the narrator, that he seems to
think that his place in Christian Oxford requires of him some proper
protestations of abhorrence.  But, if we explore the literature of
Heroism, we shall quickly come to Plutarch, who is its Doctor and
historian.  To him we owe the Brasidas, the Dion, the Epaminondas,
the Scipio of old, and I must think we are more deeply indebted to
him than to all the ancient writers.  Each of his "Lives" is a
refutation to the despondency and cowardice of our religious and
political theorists.  A wild courage, a Stoicism not of the schools,
but of the blood, shines in every anecdote, and has given that book
its immense fame.

        We need books of this tart cathartic virtue, more than books of
political science, or of private economy.  Life is a festival only to
the wise.  Seen from the nook and chimney-side of prudence, it wears
a ragged and dangerous front.  The violations of the laws of nature
by our predecessors and our contemporaries are punished in us also.
The disease and deformity around us certify the infraction of
natural, intellectual, and moral laws, and often violation on
violation to breed such compound misery.  A lock-jaw that bends a
man's head back to his heels, hydrophobia, that makes him bark at his
wife and babes, insanity, that makes him eat grass; war, plague,
cholera, famine, indicate a certain ferocity in nature, which, as it
had its inlet by human crime, must have its outlet by human
suffering.  Unhappily, no man exists who has not in his own person
become, to some amount, a stockholder in the sin, and so made himself
liable to a share in the expiation.

        Our culture, therefore, must not omit the arming of the man.
Let him hear in season, that he is born into the state of war, and
that the commonwealth and his own well-being require that he should
not go dancing in the weeds of peace, but warned, self-collected, and
neither defying nor dreading the thunder, let him take both
reputation and life in his hand, and, with perfect urbanity, dare the
gibbet and the mob by the absolute truth of his speech, and the
rectitude of his behaviour.

        Towards all this external evil, the man within the breast
assumes a warlike attitude, and affirms his ability to cope
single-handed with the infinite army of enemies.  To this military
attitude of the soul we give the name of Heroism.  Its rudest form is
the contempt for safety and ease, which makes the attractiveness of
war.  It is a self-trust which slights the restraints of prudence, in
the plenitude of its energy and power to repair the harms it may
suffer.  The hero is a mind of such balance that no disturbances can
shake his will, but pleasantly, and, as it were, merrily, he advances
to his own music, alike in frightful alarms and in the tipsy mirth of
universal dissoluteness.  There is somewhat not philosophical in
heroism; there is somewhat not holy in it; it seems not to know that
other souls are of one texture with it; it has pride; it is the
extreme of individual nature.  Nevertheless, we must profoundly
revere it.  There is somewhat in great actions, which does not allow
us to go behind them.  Heroism feels and never reasons, and therefore
is always right; and although a different breeding, different
religion, and greater intellectual activity would have modified or
even reversed the particular action, yet for the hero that thing he
does is the highest deed, and is not open to the censure of
philosophers or divines.  It is the avowal of the unschooled man,
that he finds a quality in him that is negligent of expense, of
health, of life, of danger, of hatred, of reproach, and knows that
his will is higher and more excellent than all actual and all
possible antagonists.

        Heroism works in contradiction to the voice of mankind, and in
contradiction, for a time, to the voice of the great and good.
Heroism is an obedience to a secret impulse of an individual's
character.  Now to no other man can its wisdom appear as it does to
him, for every man must be supposed to see a little farther on his
own proper path than any one else.  Therefore, just and wise men take
umbrage at his act, until after some little time be past: then they
see it to be in unison with their acts.  All prudent men see that the
action is clean contrary to a sensual prosperity; for every heroic
act measures itself by its contempt of some external good.  But it
finds its own success at last, and then the prudent also extol.

        Self-trust is the essence of heroism.  It is the state of the
soul at war, and its ultimate objects are the last defiance of
falsehood and wrong, and the power to bear all that can be inflicted
by evil agents.  It speaks the truth, and it is just, generous,
hospitable, temperate, scornful of petty calculations, and scornful
of being scorned.  It persists; it is of an undaunted boldness, and
of a fortitude not to be wearied out.  Its jest is the littleness of
common life.  That false prudence which dotes on health and wealth is
the butt and merriment of heroism.  Heroism, like Plotinus, is almost
ashamed of its body.  What shall it say, then, to the sugar-plums and
cats'-cradles, to the toilet, compliments, quarrels, cards, and
custard, which rack the wit of all society.  What joys has kind
nature provided for us dear creatures!  There seems to be no interval
between greatness and meanness.  When the spirit is not master of the
world, then it is its dupe.  Yet the little man takes the great hoax
so innocently, works in it so headlong and believing, is born red,
and dies gray, arranging his toilet, attending on his own health,
laying traps for sweet food and strong wine, setting his heart on a
horse or a rifle, made happy with a little gossip or a little praise,
that the great soul cannot choose but laugh at such earnest nonsense.
"Indeed, these humble considerations make me out of love with
greatness.  What a disgrace is it to me to take note how many pairs
of silk stockings thou hast, namely, these and those that were the
peach-colored ones; or to bear the inventory of thy shirts, as one
for superfluity, and one other for use!"

        Citizens, thinking after the laws of arithmetic, consider the
inconvenience of receiving strangers at their fireside, reckon
narrowly the loss of time and the unusual display: the soul of a
better quality thrusts back the unseasonable economy into the vaults
of life, and says, I will obey the God, and the sacrifice and the
fire he will provide.  Ibn Haukal, the Arabian geographer, describes
a heroic extreme in the hospitality of Sogd, in Bukharia.  "When I
was in Sogd, I saw a great building, like a palace, the gates of
which were open and fixed back to the wall with large nails.  I asked
the reason, and was told that the house had not been shut, night or
day, for a hundred years.  Strangers may present themselves at any
hour, and in whatever number; the master has amply provided for the
reception of the men and their animals, and is never happier than
when they tarry for some time.  Nothing of the kind have I seen in
any other country." The magnanimous know very well that they who give
time, or money, or shelter, to the stranger -- so it be done for
love, and not for ostentation -- do, as it were, put God under
obligation to them, so perfect are the compensations of the universe.
In some way the time they seem to lose is redeemed, and the pains
they seem to take remunerate themselves.  These men fan the flame of
human love, and raise the standard of civil virtue among mankind.
But hospitality must be for service, and not for show, or it pulls
down the host.  The brave soul rates itself too high to value itself
by the splendor of its table and draperies.  It gives what it hath,
and all it hath, but its own majesty can lend a better grace to
bannocks and fair water than belong to city feasts.

        The temperance of the hero proceeds from the same wish to do no
dishonor to the worthiness he has.  But he loves it for its elegancy,
not for its austerity.  It seems not worth his while to be solemn,
and denounce with bitterness flesh-eating or wine-drinking, the use
of tobacco, or opium, or tea, or silk, or gold.  A great man scarcely
knows how he dines, how he dresses; but without railing or precision,
his living is natural and poetic.  John Eliot, the Indian Apostle,
drank water, and said of wine, -- "It is a noble, generous liquor,
and we should be humbly thankful for it, but, as I remember, water
was made before it." Better still is the temperance of King David,
who poured out on the ground unto the Lord the water which three of
his warriors had brought him to drink, at the peril of their lives.

        It is told of Brutus, that when he fell on his sword, after the
battle of Philippi, he quoted a line of Euripides, -- "O virtue!  I
have followed thee through life, and I find thee at last but a
shade." I doubt not the hero is slandered by this report.  The heroic
soul does not sell its justice and its nobleness.  It does not ask to
dine nicely, and to sleep warm.  The essence of greatness is the
perception that virtue is enough.  Poverty is its ornament.  It does
not need plenty, and can very well abide its loss.

        But that which takes my fancy most, in the heroic class, is the
good-humor and hilarity they exhibit.  It is a height to which common
duty can very well attain, to suffer and to dare with solemnity.  But
these rare souls set opinion, success, and life, at so cheap a rate,
that they will not soothe their enemies by petitions, or the show of
sorrow, but wear their own habitual greatness.  Scipio, charged with
peculation, refuses to do himself so great a disgrace as to wait for
justification, though he had the scroll of his accounts in his hands,
but tears it to pieces before the tribunes.  Socrates's condemnation
of himself to be maintained in all honor in the Prytaneum, during his
life, and Sir Thomas More's playfulness at the scaffold, are of the
same strain.  In Beaumont and Fletcher's "Sea Voyage," Juletta tells
the stout captain and his company, --

        _Jul_.  Why, slaves, 't is in our power to hang ye.
        _Master_.  Very likely,
        'T is in our powers, then, to be hanged, and scorn ye."
 
        These replies are sound and whole.  Sport is the bloom and glow
of a perfect health.  The great will not condescend to take any thing
seriously; all must be as gay as the song of a canary, though it were
the building of cities, or the eradication of old and foolish
churches and nations, which have cumbered the earth long thousands of
years.  Simple hearts put all the history and customs of this world
behind them, and play their own game in innocent defiance of the
Blue-Laws of the world; and such would appear, could we see the human
race assembled in vision, like little children frolicking together;
though, to the eyes of mankind at large, they wear a stately and
solemn garb of works and influences.

        The interest these fine stories have for us, the power of a
romance over the boy who grasps the forbidden book under his bench at
school, our delight in the hero, is the main fact to our purpose.
All these great and transcendent properties are ours.  If we dilate
in beholding the Greek energy, the Roman pride, it is that we are
already domesticating the same sentiment.  Let us find room for this
great guest in our small houses.  The first step of worthiness will
be to disabuse us of our superstitious associations with places and
times, with number and size.  Why should these words, Athenian,
Roman, Asia, and England, so tingle in the ear?  Where the heart is,
there the muses, there the gods sojourn, and not in any geography of
fame.  Massachusetts, Connecticut River, and Boston Bay, you think
paltry places, and the ear loves names of foreign and classic
topography.  But here we are; and, if we will tarry a little, we may
come to learn that here is best.  See to it, only, that thyself is
here; -- and art and nature, hope and fate, friends, angels, and the
Supreme Being, shall not be absent from the chamber where thou
sittest.  Epaminondas, brave and affectionate, does not seem to us to
need Olympus to die upon, nor the Syrian sunshine.  He lies very well
where he is.  The Jerseys were handsome ground enough for Washington
to tread, and London streets for the feet of Milton.  A great man
makes his climate genial in the imagination of men, and its air the
beloved element of all delicate spirits.  That country is the
fairest, which is inhabited by the noblest minds.  The pictures which
fill the imagination in reading the actions of Pericles, Xenophon,
Columbus, Bayard, Sidney, Hampden, teach us how needlessly mean our
life is, that we, by the depth of our living, should deck it with
more than regal or national splendor, and act on principles that
should interest man and nature in the length of our days.

        We have seen or heard of many extraordinary young men, who
never ripened, or whose performance in actual life was not
extraordinary.  When we see their air and mien, when we hear them
speak of society, of books, of religion, we admire their superiority,
they seem to throw contempt on our entire polity and social state;
theirs is the tone of a youthful giant, who is sent to work
revolutions.  But they enter an active profession, and the forming
Colossus shrinks to the common size of man.  The magic they used was
the ideal tendencies, which always make the Actual ridiculous; but
the tough world had its revenge the moment they put their horses of
the sun to plough in its furrow.  They found no example and no
companion, and their heart fainted.  What then?  The lesson they gave
in their first aspirations is yet true; and a better valor and a
purer truth shall one day organize their belief.  Or why should a
woman liken herself to any historical woman, and think, because
Sappho, or Sevigne, or De Stael, or the cloistered souls who have had
genius and cultivation, do not satisfy the imagination and the serene
Themis, none can, -- certainly not she.  Why not?  She has a new and
unattempted problem to solve, perchance that of the happiest nature
that ever bloomed.  Let the maiden, with erect soul, walk serenely on
her way, accept the hint of each new experience, search in turn all
the objects that solicit her eye, that she may learn the power and
the charm of her new-born being, which is the kindling of a new dawn
in the recesses of space.  The fair girl, who repels interference by
a decided and proud choice of influences, so careless of pleasing, so
wilful and lofty, inspires every beholder with somewhat of her own
nobleness.  The silent heart encourages her; O friend, never strike
sail to a fear!  Come into port greatly, or sail with God the seas.
Not in vain you live, for every passing eye is cheered and refined by
the vision.

        The characteristic of heroism is its persistency.  All men have
wandering impulses, fits, and starts of generosity.  But when you
have chosen your part, abide by it, and do not weakly try to
reconcile yourself with the world.  The heroic cannot be the common,
nor the common the heroic.  Yet we have the weakness to expect the
sympathy of people in those actions whose excellence is that they
outrun sympathy, and appeal to a tardy justice.  If you would serve
your brother, because it is fit for you to serve him, do not take
back your words when you find that prudent people do not commend you.
Adhere to your own act, and congratulate yourself if you have done
something strange and extravagant, and broken the monotony of a
decorous age.  It was a high counsel that I once heard given to a
young person, -- "Always do what you are afraid to do." A simple,
manly character need never make an apology, but should regard its
past action with the calmness of Phocion, when he admitted that the
event of the battle was happy, yet did not regret his dissuasion from
the battle.

        There is no weakness or exposure for which we cannot find
consolation in the thought, -- this is a part of my constitution,
part of my relation and office to my fellow-creature.  Has nature
covenanted with me that I should never appear to disadvantage, never
make a ridiculous figure?  Let us be generous of our dignity, as well
as of our money.  Greatness once and for ever has done with opinion.
We tell our charities, not because we wish to be praised for them,
not because we think they have great merit, but for our
justification.  It is a capital blunder; as you discover, when
another man recites his charities.

        To speak the truth, even with some austerity, to live with some
rigor of temperance, or some extremes of generosity, seems to be an
asceticism which common good-nature would appoint to those who are at
ease and in plenty, in sign that they feel a brotherhood with the
great multitude of suffering men.  And not only need we breathe and
exercise the soul by assuming the penalties of abstinence, of debt,
of solitude, of unpopularity, but it behooves the wise man to look
with a bold eye into those rarer dangers which sometimes invade men,
and to familiarize himself with disgusting forms of disease, with
sounds of execration, and the vision of violent death.

        Times of heroism are generally times of terror, but the day
never shines in which this element may not work.  The circumstances
of man, we say, are historically somewhat better in this country, and
at this hour, than perhaps ever before.  More freedom exists for
culture.  It will not now run against an axe at the first step out of
the beaten track of opinion.  But whoso is heroic will always find
crises to try his edge.  Human virtue demands her champions and
martyrs, and the trial of persecution always proceeds.  It is but the
other day that the brave Lovejoy gave his breast to the bullets of a
mob, for the rights of free speech and opinion, and died when it was
better not to live.

        I see not any road of perfect peace which a man can walk, but
after the counsel of his own bosom.  Let him quit too much
association, let him go home much, and stablish himself in those
courses he approves.  The unremitting retention of simple and high
sentiments in obscure duties is hardening the character to that
temper which will work with honor, if need be, in the tumult, or on
the scaffold.  Whatever outrages have happened to men may befall a
man again; and very easily in a republic, if there appear any signs
of a decay of religion.  Coarse slander, fire, tar and feathers, and
the gibbet, the youth may freely bring home to his mind, and with
what sweetness of temper he can, and inquire how fast he can fix his
sense of duty, braving such penalties, whenever it may please the
next newspaper and a sufficient number of his neighbours to pronounce
his opinions incendiary.

        It may calm the apprehension of calamity in the most
susceptible heart to see how quick a bound nature has set to the
utmost infliction of malice.  We rapidly approach a brink over which
no enemy can follow us.
 
        "Let them rave:
        Thou art quiet in thy grave."
 
        In the gloom of our ignorance of what shall be, in the hour
when we are deaf to the higher voices, who does not envy those who
have seen safely to an end their manful endeavour?  Who that sees the
meanness of our politics, but inly congratulates Washington that he
is long already wrapped in his shroud, and for ever safe; that he was
laid sweet in his grave, the hope of humanity not yet subjugated in
him?  Who does not sometimes envy the good and brave, who are no more
to suffer from the tumults of the natural world, and await with
curious complacency the speedy term of his own conversation with
finite nature?  And yet the love that will be annihilated sooner than
treacherous has already made death impossible, and affirms itself no
mortal, but a native of the deeps of absolute and inextinguishable
being.

 
 
        THE OVER-SOUL
 
 
        "But souls that of his own good life partake,
        He loves as his own self; dear as his eye
        They are to Him: He'll never them forsake:
        When they shall die, then God himself shall die:
        They live, they live in blest eternity."
        _Henry More_

 
        Space is ample, east and west,
        But two cannot go abreast,
        Cannot travel in it two:
        Yonder masterful cuckoo
        Crowds every egg out of the nest,
        Quick or dead, except its own;
        A spell is laid on sod and stone,
        Night and Day 've been tampered with,
        Every quality and pith
        Surcharged and sultry with a power
        That works its will on age and hour.
 
 
 
        ESSAY IX _The Over-Soul_

        There is a difference between one and another hour of life, in
their authority and subsequent effect.  Our faith comes in moments;
our vice is habitual.  Yet there is a depth in those brief moments
which constrains us to ascribe more reality to them than to all other
experiences.  For this reason, the argument which is always
forthcoming to silence those who conceive extraordinary hopes of man,
namely, the appeal to experience, is for ever invalid and vain.  We
give up the past to the objector, and yet we hope.  He must explain
this hope.  We grant that human life is mean; but how did we find out
that it was mean?  What is the ground of this uneasiness of ours; of
this old discontent?  What is the universal sense of want and
ignorance, but the fine inuendo by which the soul makes its enormous
claim?  Why do men feel that the natural history of man has never
been written, but he is always leaving behind what you have said of
him, and it becomes old, and books of metaphysics worthless?  The
philosophy of six thousand years has not searched the chambers and
magazines of the soul.  In its experiments there has always remained,
in the last analysis, a residuum it could not resolve.  Man is a
stream whose source is hidden.  Our being is descending into us from
we know not whence.  The most exact calculator has no prescience that
somewhat incalculable may not balk the very next moment.  I am
constrained every moment to acknowledge a higher origin for events
than the will I call mine.

        As with events, so is it with thoughts.  When I watch that
flowing river, which, out of regions I see not, pours for a season
its streams into me, I see that I am a pensioner; not a cause, but a
surprised spectator of this ethereal water; that I desire and look
up, and put myself in the attitude of reception, but from some alien
energy the visions come.

        The Supreme Critic on the errors of the past and the present,
and the only prophet of that which must be, is that great nature in
which we rest, as the earth lies in the soft arms of the atmosphere;
that Unity, that Over-soul, within which every man's particular being
is contained and made one with all other;that common heart, of which
all sincere conversation is the worship, to which all right action is
submission; that overpowering reality which confutes our tricks and
talents, and constrains every one to pass for what he is, and to
speak from his character, and not from his tongue, and which evermore
tends to pass into our thought and hand, and become wisdom, and
virtue, and power, and beauty.  We live in succession, in division,
in parts, in particles.  Meantime within man is the soul of the
whole; the wise silence; the universal beauty, to which every part
and particle is equally related; the eternal ONE.  And this deep
power in which we exist, and whose beatitude is all accessible to us,
is not only self-sufficing and perfect in every hour, but the act of
seeing and the thing seen, the seer and the spectacle, the subject
and the object, are one.  We see the world piece by piece, as the
sun, the moon, the animal, the tree; but the whole, of which these
are the shining parts, is the soul.  Only by the vision of that
Wisdom can the horoscope of the ages be read, and by falling back on
our better thoughts, by yielding to the spirit of prophecy which is
innate in every man, we can know what it saith.  Every man's words,
who speaks from that life, must sound vain to those who do not dwell
in the same thought on their own part.  I dare not speak for it.  My
words do not carry its august sense; they fall short and cold.  Only
itself can inspire whom it will, and behold! their speech shall be
lyrical, and sweet, and universal as the rising of the wind.  Yet I
desire, even by profane words, if I may not use sacred, to indicate
the heaven of this deity, and to report what hints I have collected
of the transcendent simplicity and energy of the Highest Law.

        If we consider what happens in conversation, in reveries, in
remorse, in times of passion, in surprises, in the instructions of
dreams, wherein often we see ourselves in masquerade, -- the droll
disguises only magnifying and enhancing a real element, and forcing
it on our distinct notice, -- we shall catch many hints that will
broaden and lighten into knowledge of the secret of nature.  All goes
to show that the soul in man is not an organ, but animates and
exercises all the organs; is not a function, like the power of
memory, of calculation, of comparison, but uses these as hands and
feet; is not a faculty, but a light; is not the intellect or the
will, but the master of the intellect and the will; is the background
of our being, in which they lie, -- an immensity not possessed and
that cannot be possessed.  From within or from behind, a light shines
through us upon things, and makes us aware that we are nothing, but
the light is all.  A man is the fasade of a temple wherein all wisdom
and all good abide.  What we commonly call man, the eating, drinking,
planting, counting man, does not, as we know him, represent himself,
but misrepresents himself.  Him we do not respect, but the soul,
whose organ he is, would he let it appear through his action, would
make our knees bend.  When it breathes through his intellect, it is
genius; when it breathes through his will, it is virtue; when it
flows through his affection, it is love.  And the blindness of the
intellect begins, when it would be something of itself.  The weakness
of the will begins, when the individual would be something of
himself.  All reform aims, in some one particular, to let the soul
have its way through us; in other words, to engage us to obey.

        Of this pure nature every man is at some time sensible.
Language cannot paint it with his colors.  It is too subtile.  It is
undefinable, unmeasurable, but we know that it pervades and contains
us.  We know that all spiritual being is in man.  A wise old proverb
says, "God comes to see us without bell"; that is, as there is no
screen or ceiling between our heads and the infinite heavens, so is
there no bar or wall in the soul where man, the effect, ceases, and
God, the cause, begins.  The walls are taken away.  We lie open on
one side to the deeps of spiritual nature, to the attributes of God.
Justice we see and know, Love, Freedom, Power.  These natures no man
ever got above, but they tower over us, and most in the moment when
our interests tempt us to wound them.

        The sovereignty of this nature whereof we speak is made known
by its independency of those limitations which circumscribe us on
every hand.  The soul circumscribes all things.  As I have said, it
contradicts all experience.  In like manner it abolishes time and
space.  The influence of the senses has, in most men, overpowered the
mind to that degree, that the walls of time and space have come to
look real and insurmountable; and to speak with levity of these
limits is, in the world, the sign of insanity.  Yet time and space
are but inverse measures of the force of the soul.  The spirit sports
with time, --

        "Can crowd eternity into an hour,
        Or stretch an hour to eternity."
 
        We are often made to feel that there is another youth and age
than that which is measured from the year of our natural birth.  Some
thoughts always find us young, and keep us so.  Such a thought is the
love of the universal and eternal beauty.  Every man parts from that
contemplation with the feeling that it rather belongs to ages than to
mortal life.  The least activity of the intellectual powers redeems
us in a degree from the conditions of time.  In sickness, in languor,
give us a strain of poetry, or a profound sentence, and we are
refreshed; or produce a volume of Plato, or Shakspeare, or remind us
of their names, and instantly we come into a feeling of longevity.
See how the deep, divine thought reduces centuries, and millenniums,
and makes itself present through all ages.  Is the teaching of Christ
less effective now than it was when first his mouth was opened?  The
emphasis of facts and persons in my thought has nothing to do with
time.  And so, always, the soul's scale is one; the scale of the
senses and the understanding is another.  Before the revelations of
the soul, Time, Space, and Nature shrink away.  In common speech, we
refer all things to time, as we habitually refer the immensely
sundered stars to one concave sphere.  And so we say that the
Judgment is distant or near, that the Millennium approaches, that a
day of certain political, moral, social reforms is at hand, and the
like, when we mean, that, in the nature of things, one of the facts
we contemplate is external and fugitive, and the other is permanent
and connate with the soul.  The things we now esteem fixed shall, one
by one, detach themselves, like ripe fruit, from our experience, and
fall.  The wind shall blow them none knows whither.  The landscape,
the figures, Boston, London, are facts as fugitive as any institution
past, or any whiff of mist or smoke, and so is society, and so is the
world.  The soul looketh steadily forwards, creating a world before
her, leaving worlds behind her.  She has no dates, nor rites, nor
persons, nor specialties, nor men.  The soul knows only the soul; the
web of events is the flowing robe in which she is clothed.

 
        After its own law and not by arithmetic is the rate of its
progress to be computed.  The soul's advances are not made by
gradation, such as can be represented by motion in a straight line;
but rather by ascension of state, such as can be represented by
metamorphosis, -- from the egg to the worm, from the worm to the fly.
The growths of genius are of a certain _total_ character, that does
not advance the elect individual first over John, then Adam, then
Richard, and give to each the pain of discovered inferiority, but by
every throe of growth the man expands there where he works, passing,
at each pulsation, classes, populations, of men.  With each divine
impulse the mind rends the thin rinds of the visible and finite, and
comes out into eternity, and inspires and expires its air.  It
converses with truths that have always been spoken in the world, and
becomes conscious of a closer sympathy with Zeno and Arrian, than
with persons in the house.

        This is the law of moral and of mental gain.  The simple rise
as by specific levity, not into a particular virtue, but into the
region of all the virtues.  They are in the spirit which contains
them all.  The soul requires purity, but purity is not it; requires
justice, but justice is not that; requires beneficence, but is
somewhat better; so that there is a kind of descent and accommodation
felt when we leave speaking of moral nature, to urge a virtue which
it enjoins.  To the well-born child, all the virtues are natural, and
not painfully acquired.  Speak to his heart, and the man becomes
suddenly virtuous.

        Within the same sentiment is the germ of intellectual growth,
which obeys the same law.  Those who are capable of humility, of
justice, of love, of aspiration, stand already on a platform that
commands the sciences and arts, speech and poetry, action and grace.
For whoso dwells in this moral beatitude already anticipates those
special powers which men prize so highly.  The lover has no talent,
no skill, which passes for quite nothing with his enamoured maiden,
however little she may possess of related faculty; and the heart
which abandons itself to the Supreme Mind finds itself related to all
its works, and will travel a royal road to particular knowledges and
powers.  In ascending to this primary and aboriginal sentiment, we
have come from our remote station on the circumference
instantaneously to the centre of the world, where, as in the closet
of God, we see causes, and anticipate the universe, which is but a
slow effect.

        One mode of the divine teaching is the incarnation of the
spirit in a form, -- in forms, like my own.  I live in society; with
persons who answer to thoughts in my own mind, or express a certain
obedience to the great instincts to which I live.  I see its presence
to them.  I am certified of a common nature; and these other souls,
these separated selves, draw me as nothing else can.  They stir in me
the new emotions we call passion; of love, hatred, fear, admiration,
pity; thence comes conversation, competition, persuasion, cities, and
war.  Persons are supplementary to the primary teaching of the soul.
In youth we are mad for persons.  Childhood and youth see all the
world in them.  But the larger experience of man discovers the
identical nature appearing through them all.  Persons themselves
acquaint us with the impersonal.  In all conversation between two
persons, tacit reference is made, as to a third party, to a common
nature.  That third party or common nature is not social; it is
impersonal; is God.  And so in groups where debate is earnest, and
especially on high questions, the company become aware that the
thought rises to an equal level in all bosoms, that all have a
spiritual property in what was said, as well as the sayer.  They all
become wiser than they were.  It arches over them like a temple, this
unity of thought, in which every heart beats with nobler sense of
power and duty, and thinks and acts with unusual solemnity.  All are
conscious of attaining to a higher self-possession.  It shines for
all.  There is a certain wisdom of humanity which is common to the
greatest men with the lowest, and which our ordinary education often
labors to silence and obstruct.  The mind is one, and the best minds,
who love truth for its own sake, think much less of property in
truth.  They accept it thankfully everywhere, and do not label or
stamp it with any man's name, for it is theirs long beforehand, and
from eternity.  The learned and the studious of thought have no
monopoly of wisdom.  Their violence of direction in some degree
disqualifies them to think truly.  We owe many valuable observations
to people who are not very acute or profound, and who say the thing
without effort, which we want and have long been hunting in vain.
The action of the soul is oftener in that which is felt and left
unsaid, than in that which is said in any conversation.  It broods
over every society, and they unconsciously seek for it in each other.
We know better than we do.  We do not yet possess ourselves, and we
know at the same time that we are much more.  I feel the same truth
how often in my trivial conversation with my neighbours, that
somewhat higher in each of us overlooks this by-play, and Jove nods
to Jove from behind each of us.

        Men descend to meet.  In their habitual and mean service to the
world, for which they forsake their native nobleness, they resemble
those Arabian sheiks, who dwell in mean houses, and affect an
external poverty, to escape the rapacity of the Pacha, and reserve
all their display of wealth for their interior and guarded
retirements.

        As it is present in all persons, so it is in every period of
life.  It is adult already in the infant man.  In my dealing with my
child, my Latin and Greek, my accomplishments and my money stead me
nothing; but as much soul as I have avails.  If I am wilful, he sets
his will against mine, one for one, and leaves me, if I please, the
degradation of beating him by my superiority of strength.  But if I
renounce my will, and act for the soul, setting that up as umpire
between us two, out of his young eyes looks the same soul; he reveres
and loves with me.

        The soul is the perceiver and revealer of truth.  We know truth
when we see it, let skeptic and scoffer say what they choose.
Foolish people ask you, when you have spoken what they do not wish to
hear, `How do you know it is truth, and not an error of your own?' We
know truth when we see it, from opinion, as we know when we are awake
that we are awake.  It was a grand sentence of Emanuel Swedenborg,
which would alone indicate the greatness of that man's perception, --
"It is no proof of a man's understanding to be able to confirm
whatever he pleases; but to be able to discern that what is true is
true, and that what is false is false, this is the mark and character
of intelligence." In the book I read, the good thought returns to me,
as every truth will, the image of the whole soul.  To the bad thought
which I find in it, the same soul becomes a discerning, separating
sword, and lops it away.  We are wiser than we know.  If we will not
interfere with our thought, but will act entirely, or see how the
thing stands in God, we know the particular thing, and every thing,
and every man.  For the Maker of all things and all persons stands
behind us, and casts his dread omniscience through us over things.

        But beyond this recognition of its own in particular passages
of the individual's experience, it also reveals truth.  And here we
should seek to reinforce ourselves by its very presence, and to speak
with a worthier, loftier strain of that advent.  For the soul's
communication of truth is the highest event in nature, since it then
does not give somewhat from itself, but it gives itself, or passes
into and becomes that man whom it enlightens; or, in proportion to
that truth he receives, it takes him to itself.

        We distinguish the announcements of the soul, its
manifestations of its own nature, by the term _Revelation_.  These
are always attended by the emotion of the sublime.  For this
communication is an influx of the Divine mind into our mind.  It is
an ebb of the individual rivulet before the flowing surges of the sea
of life.  Every distinct apprehension of this central commandment
agitates men with awe and delight.  A thrill passes through all men
at the reception of new truth, or at the performance of a great
action, which comes out of the heart of nature.  In these
communications, the power to see is not separated from the will to
do, but the insight proceeds from obedience, and the obedience
proceeds from a joyful perception.  Every moment when the individual
feels himself invaded by it is memorable.  By the necessity of our
constitution, a certain enthusiasm attends the individual's
consciousness of that divine presence.  The character and duration of
this enthusiasm varies with the state of the individual, from an
ecstasy and trance and prophetic inspiration, -- which is its rarer
appearance, -- to the faintest glow of virtuous emotion, in which
form it warms, like our household fires, all the families and
associations of men, and makes society possible.  A certain tendency
to insanity has always attended the opening of the religious sense in
men, as if they had been "blasted with excess of light." The trances
of Socrates, the "union" of Plotinus, the vision of Porphyry, the
conversion of Paul, the aurora of Behmen, the convulsions of George
Fox and his Quakers, the illumination of Swedenborg, are of this
kind.  What was in the case of these remarkable persons a ravishment
has, in innumerable instances in common life, been exhibited in less
striking manner.  Everywhere the history of religion betrays a
tendency to enthusiasm.  The rapture of the Moravian and Quietist;
the opening of the internal sense of the Word, in the language of the
New Jerusalem Church; the _revival_ of the Calvinistic churches; the
_experiences_ of the Methodists, are varying forms of that shudder of
awe and delight with which the individual soul always mingles with
the universal soul.

        The nature of these revelations is the same; they are
perceptions of the absolute law.  They are solutions of the soul's
own questions.  They do not answer the questions which the
understanding asks.  The soul answers never by words, but by the
thing itself that is inquired after.

        Revelation is the disclosure of the soul.  The popular notion
of a revelation is, that it is a telling of fortunes.  In past
oracles of the soul, the understanding seeks to find answers to
sensual questions, and undertakes to tell from God how long men shall
exist, what their hands shall do, and who shall be their company,
adding names, and dates, and places.  But we must pick no locks.  We
must check this low curiosity.  An answer in words is delusive; it is
really no answer to the questions you ask.  Do not require a
description of the countries towards which you sail.  The description
does not describe them to you, and to-morrow you arrive there, and
know them by inhabiting them.  Men ask concerning the immortality of
the soul, the employments of heaven, the state of the sinner, and so
forth.  They even dream that Jesus has left replies to precisely
these interrogatories.  Never a moment did that sublime spirit speak
in their _patois_.  To truth, justice, love, the attributes of the
soul, the idea of immutableness is essentially associated.  Jesus,
living in these moral sentiments, heedless of sensual fortunes,
heeding only the manifestations of these, never made the separation
of the idea of duration from the essence of these attributes, nor
uttered a syllable concerning the duration of the soul.  It was left
to his disciples to sever duration from the moral elements, and to
teach the immortality of the soul as a doctrine, and maintain it by
evidences.  The moment the doctrine of the immortality is separately
taught, man is already fallen.  In the flowing of love, in the
adoration of humility, there is no question of continuance.  No
inspired man ever asks this question, or condescends to these
evidences.  For the soul is true to itself, and the man in whom it is
shed abroad cannot wander from the present, which is infinite, to a
future which would be finite.

        These questions which we lust to ask about the future are a
confession of sin.  God has no answer for them.  No answer in words
can reply to a question of things.  It is not in an arbitrary "decree
of God," but in the nature of man, that a veil shuts down on the
facts of to-morrow; for the soul will not have us read any other
cipher than that of cause and effect.  By this veil, which curtains
events, it instructs the children of men to live in to-day.  The only
mode of obtaining an answer to these questions of the senses is to
forego all low curiosity, and, accepting the tide of being which
floats us into the secret of nature, work and live, work and live,
and all unawares the advancing soul has built and forged for itself a
new condition, and the question and the answer are one.

        By the same fire, vital, consecrating, celestial, which burns
until it shall dissolve all things into the waves and surges of an
ocean of light, we see and know each other, and what spirit each is
of.  Who can tell the grounds of his knowledge of the character of
the several individuals in his circle of friends?  No man.  Yet their
acts and words do not disappoint him.  In that man, though he knew no
ill of him, he put no trust.  In that other, though they had seldom
met, authentic signs had yet passed, to signify that he might be
trusted as one who had an interest in his own character.  We know
each other very well, -- which of us has been just to himself, and
whether that which we teach or behold is only an aspiration, or is
our honest effort also.

        We are all discerners of spirits.  That diagnosis lies aloft in
our life or unconscious power.  The intercourse of society, -- its
trade, its religion, its friendships, its quarrels,--- is one wide,
judicial investigation of character.  In full court, or in small
committee, or confronted face to face, accuser and accused, men offer
themselves to be judged.  Against their will they exhibit those
decisive trifles by which character is read.  But who judges? and
what?  Not our understanding.  We do not read them by learning or
craft.  No; the wisdom of the wise man consists herein, that he does
not judge them; he lets them judge themselves, and merely reads and
records their own verdict.

        By virtue of this inevitable nature, private will is
overpowered, and, maugre our efforts or our imperfections, your
genius will speak from you, and mine from me.  That which we are, we
shall teach, not voluntarily, but involuntarily.  Thoughts come into
our minds by avenues which we never left open, and thoughts go out of
our minds through avenues which we never voluntarily opened.
Character teaches over our head.  The infallible index of true
progress is found in the tone the man takes.  Neither his age, nor
his breeding, nor company, nor books, nor actions, nor talents, nor
all together, can hinder him from being deferential to a higher
spirit than his own.  If he have not found his home in God, his
manners, his forms of speech, the turn of his sentences, the build,
shall I say, of all his opinions, will involuntarily confess it, let
him brave it out how he will.  If he have found his centre, the Deity
will shine through him, through all the disguises of ignorance, of
ungenial temperament, of unfavorable circumstance.  The tone of
seeking is one, and the tone of having is another.

        The great distinction between teachers sacred or literary, --
between poets like Herbert, and poets like Pope, -- between
philosophers like Spinoza, Kant, and Coleridge, and philosophers like
Locke, Paley, Mackintosh, and Stewart, -- between men of the world,
who are reckoned accomplished talkers, and here and there a fervent
mystic, prophesying, half insane under the infinitude of his thought,
-- is, that one class speak _from within_, or from experience, as
parties and possessors of the fact; and the other class, _from
without_, as spectators merely, or perhaps as acquainted with the
fact on the evidence of third persons.  It is of no use to preach to
me from without.  I can do that too easily myself.  Jesus speaks
always from within, and in a degree that transcends all others.  In
that is the miracle.  I believe beforehand that it ought so to be.
All men stand continually in the expectation of the appearance of
such a teacher.  But if a man do not speak from within the veil,
where the word is one with that it tells of, let him lowly confess
it.

 
        The same Omniscience flows into the intellect, and makes what
we call genius.  Much of the wisdom of the world is not wisdom, and
the most illuminated class of men are no doubt superior to literary
fame, and are not writers.  Among the multitude of scholars and
authors, we feel no hallowing presence; we are sensible of a knack
and skill rather than of inspiration; they have a light, and know not
whence it comes, and call it their own; their talent is some
exaggerated faculty, some overgrown member, so that their strength is
a disease.  In these instances the intellectual gifts do not make the
impression of virtue, but almost of vice; and we feel that a man's
talents stand in the way of his advancement in truth.  But genius is
religious.  It is a larger imbibing of the common heart.  It is not
anomalous, but more like, and not less like other men.  There is, in
all great poets, a wisdom of humanity which is superior to any
talents they exercise.  The author, the wit, the partisan, the fine
gentleman, does not take place of the man.  Humanity shines in Homer,
in Chaucer, in Spenser, in Shakspeare, in Milton.  They are content
with truth.  They use the positive degree.  They seem frigid and
phlegmatic to those who have been spiced with the frantic passion and
violent coloring of inferior, but popular writers.  For they are
poets by the free course which they allow to the informing soul,
which through their eyes beholds again, and blesses the things which
it hath made.  The soul is superior to its knowledge; wiser than any
of its works.  The great poet makes us feel our own wealth, and then
we think less of his compositions.  His best communication to our
mind is to teach us to despise all he has done.  Shakspeare carries
us to such a lofty strain of intelligent activity, as to suggest a
wealth which beggars his own; and we then feel that the splendid
works which he has created, and which in other hours we extol as a
sort of self-existent poetry, take no stronger hold of real nature
than the shadow of a passing traveller on the rock.  The inspiration
which uttered itself in Hamlet and Lear could utter things as good
from day to day, for ever.  Why, then, should I make account of
Hamlet and Lear, as if we had not the soul from which they fell as
syllables from the tongue?

        This energy does not descend into individual life on any other
condition than entire possession.  It comes to the lowly and simple;
it comes to whomsoever will put off what is foreign and proud; it
comes as insight; it comes as serenity and grandeur.  When we see
those whom it inhabits, we are apprized of new degrees of greatness.
From that inspiration the man comes back with a changed tone.  He
does not talk with men with an eye to their opinion.  He tries them.
It requires of us to be plain and true.  The vain traveller attempts
to embellish his life by quoting my lord, and the prince, and the
countess, who thus said or did to _him._ The ambitious vulgar show
you their spoons, and brooches, and rings, and preserve their cards
and compliments.  The more cultivated, in their account of their own
experience, cull out the pleasing, poetic circumstance, -- the visit
to Rome, the man of genius they saw, the brilliant friend they know;
still further on, perhaps, the gorgeous landscape, the mountain
lights, the mountain thoughts, they enjoyed yesterday, -- and so seek
to throw a romantic color over their life.  But the soul that ascends
to worship the great God is plain and true; has no rose-color, no
fine friends, no chivalry, no adventures; does not want admiration;
dwells in the hour that now is, in the earnest experience of the
common day, -- by reason of the present moment and the mere trifle
having become porous to thought, and bibulous of the sea of light.

        Converse with a mind that is grandly simple, and literature
looks like word-catching.  The simplest utterances are worthiest to
be written, yet are they so cheap, and so things of course, that, in
the infinite riches of the soul, it is like gathering a few pebbles
off the ground, or bottling a little air in a phial, when the whole
earth and the whole atmosphere are ours.  Nothing can pass there, or
make you one of the circle, but the casting aside your trappings, and
dealing man to man in naked truth, plain confession, and omniscient
affirmation.

        Souls such as these treat you as gods would; walk as gods in
the earth, accepting without any admiration your wit, your bounty,
your virtue even, -- say rather your act of duty, for your virtue
they own as their proper blood, royal as themselves, and over-royal,
and the father of the gods.  But what rebuke their plain fraternal
bearing casts on the mutual flattery with which authors solace each
other and wound themselves!  These flatter not.  I do not wonder that
these men go to see Cromwell, and Christina, and Charles the Second,
and James the First, and the Grand Turk.  For they are, in their own
elevation, the fellows of kings, and must feel the servile tone of
conversation in the world.  They must always be a godsend to princes,
for they confront them, a king to a king, without ducking or
concession, and give a high nature the refreshment and satisfaction
of resistance, of plain humanity, of even companionship, and of new
ideas.  They leave them wiser and superior men.  Souls like these
make us feel that sincerity is more excellent than flattery.  Deal so
plainly with man and woman, as to constrain the utmost sincerity, and
destroy all hope of trifling with you.  It is the highest compliment
you can pay.  Their "highest praising," said Milton, "is not
flattery, and their plainest advice is a kind of praising."

        Ineffable is the union of man and God in every act of the soul.
The simplest person, who in his integrity worships God, becomes God;
yet for ever and ever the influx of this better and universal self is
new and unsearchable.  It inspires awe and astonishment.  How dear,
how soothing to man, arises the idea of God, peopling the lonely
place, effacing the scars of our mistakes and disappointments!  When
we have broken our god of tradition, and ceased from our god of
rhetoric, then may God fire the heart with his presence.  It is the
doubling of the heart itself, nay, the infinite enlargement of the
heart with a power of growth to a new infinity on every side.  It
inspires in man an infallible trust.  He has not the conviction, but
the sight, that the best is the true, and may in that thought easily
dismiss all particular uncertainties and fears, and adjourn to the
sure revelation of time, the solution of his private riddles.  He is
sure that his welfare is dear to the heart of being.  In the presence
of law to his mind, he is overflowed with a reliance so universal,
that it sweeps away all cherished hopes and the most stable projects
of mortal condition in its flood.  He believes that he cannot escape
from his good.  The things that are really for thee gravitate to
thee.  You are running to seek your friend.  Let your feet run, but
your mind need not.  If you do not find him, will you not acquiesce
that it is best you should not find him? for there is a power, which,
as it is in you, is in him also, and could therefore very well bring
you together, if it were for the best.  You are preparing with
eagerness to go and render a service to which your talent and your
taste invite you, the love of men and the hope of fame.  Has it not
occurred to you, that you have no right to go, unless you are equally
willing to be prevented from going?  O, believe, as thou livest, that
every sound that is spoken over the round world, which thou oughtest
to hear, will vibrate on thine ear!  Every proverb, every book, every
byword that belongs to thee for aid or comfort, shall surely come
home through open or winding passages.  Every friend whom not thy
fantastic will, but the great and tender heart in thee craveth, shall
lock thee in his embrace.  And this, because the heart in thee is the
heart of all; not a valve, not a wall, not an intersection is there
anywhere in nature, but one blood rolls uninterruptedly an endless
circulation through all men, as the water of the globe is all one
sea, and, truly seen, its tide is one.

        Let man, then, learn the revelation of all nature and all
thought to his heart; this, namely; that the Highest dwells with him;
that the sources of nature are in his own mind, if the sentiment of
duty is there.  But if he would know what the great God speaketh, he
must `go into his closet and shut the door,' as Jesus said.  God will
not make himself manifest to cowards.  He must greatly listen to
himself, withdrawing himself from all the accents of other men's
devotion.  Even their prayers are hurtful to him, until he have made
his own.  Our religion vulgarly stands on numbers of believers.
Whenever the appeal is made -- no matter how indirectly -- to
numbers, proclamation is then and there made, that religion is not.
He that finds God a sweet, enveloping thought to him never counts his
company.  When I sit in that presence, who shall dare to come in?
When I rest in perfect humility, when I burn with pure love, what can
Calvin or Swedenborg say?

        It makes no difference whether the appeal is to numbers or to
one.  The faith that stands on authority is not faith.  The reliance
on authority measures the decline of religion, the withdrawal of the
soul.  The position men have given to Jesus, now for many centuries
of history, is a position of authority.  It characterizes themselves.
It cannot alter the eternal facts.  Great is the soul, and plain.  It
is no flatterer, it is no follower; it never appeals from itself.  It
believes in itself.  Before the immense possibilities of man, all
mere experience, all past biography, however spotless and sainted,
shrinks away.  Before that heaven which our presentiments foreshow
us, we cannot easily praise any form of life we have seen or read of.
We not only affirm that we have few great men, but, absolutely
speaking, that we have none; that we have no history, no record of
any character or mode of living, that entirely contents us.  The
saints and demigods whom history worships we are constrained to
accept with a grain of allowance.  Though in our lonely hours we draw
a new strength out of their memory, yet, pressed on our attention, as
they are by the thoughtless and customary, they fatigue and invade.
The soul gives itself, alone, original, and pure, to the Lonely,
Original, and Pure, who, on that condition, gladly inhabits, leads,
and speaks through it.  Then is it glad, young, and nimble.  It is
not wise, but it sees through all things.  It is not called
religious, but it is innocent.  It calls the light its own, and feels
that the grass grows and the stone falls by a law inferior to, and
dependent on, its nature.  Behold, it saith, I am born into the
great, the universal mind.  I, the imperfect, adore my own Perfect.
I am somehow receptive of the great soul, and thereby I do overlook
the sun and the stars, and feel them to be the fair accidents and
effects which change and pass.  More and more the surges of
everlasting nature enter into me, and I become public and human in my
regards and actions.  So come I to live in thoughts, and act with
energies, which are immortal.  Thus revering the soul, and learning,
as the ancient said, that "its beauty is immense," man will come to
see that the world is the perennial miracle which the soul worketh,
and be less astonished at particular wonders; he will learn that
there is no profane history; that all history is sacred; that the
universe is represented in an atom, in a moment of time.  He will
weave no longer a spotted life of shreds and patches, but he will
live with a divine unity.  He will cease from what is base and
frivolous in his life, and be content with all places and with any
service he can render.  He will calmly front the morrow in the
negligency of that trust which carries God with it, and so hath
already the whole future in the bottom of the heart.

 
 
        CIRCLES
 
        Nature centres into balls,
        And her proud ephemerals,
        Fast to surface and outside,
        Scan the profile of the sphere;
        Knew they what that signified,
        A new genesis were here.
 
 

        ESSAY X _Circles_
 
        The eye is the first circle; the horizon which it forms is the
second; and throughout nature this primary figure is repeated without
end.  It is the highest emblem in the cipher of the world.  St.
Augustine described the nature of God as a circle whose centre was
everywhere, and its circumference nowhere.  We are all our lifetime
reading the copious sense of this first of forms.  One moral we have
already deduced, in considering the circular or compensatory
character of every human action.  Another analogy we shall now trace;
that every action admits of being outdone.  Our life is an
apprenticeship to the truth, that around every circle another can be
drawn; that there is no end in nature, but every end is a beginning;
that there is always another dawn risen on mid-noon, and under every
deep a lower deep opens.

        This fact, as far as it symbolizes the moral fact of the
Unattainable, the flying Perfect, around which the hands of man can
never meet, at once the inspirer and the condemner of every success,
may conveniently serve us to connect many illustrations of human
power in every department.

        There are no fixtures in nature.  The universe is fluid and
volatile.  Permanence is but a word of degrees.  Our globe seen by
God is a transparent law, not a mass of facts.  The law dissolves the
fact and holds it fluid.  Our culture is the predominance of an idea
which draws after it this train of cities and institutions.  Let us
rise into another idea: they will disappear.  The Greek sculpture is
all melted away, as if it had been statues of ice; here and there a
solitary figure or fragment remaining, as we see flecks and scraps of
snow left in cold dells and mountain clefts, in June and July.  For
the genius that created it creates now somewhat else.  The Greek
letters last a little longer, but are already passing under the same
sentence, and tumbling into the inevitable pit which the creation of
new thought opens for all that is old.  The new continents are built
out of the ruins of an old planet; the new races fed out of the
decomposition of the foregoing.  New arts destroy the old.  See the
investment of capital in aqueducts made useless by hydraulics;
fortifications, by gunpowder; roads and canals, by railways; sails,
by steam; steam by electricity.

        You admire this tower of granite, weathering the hurts of so
many ages.  Yet a little waving hand built this huge wall, and that
which builds is better than that which is built.  The hand that built
can topple it down much faster.  Better than the hand, and nimbler,
was the invisible thought which wrought through it; and thus ever,
behind the coarse effect, is a fine cause, which, being narrowly
seen, is itself the effect of a finer cause.  Every thing looks
permanent until its secret is known.  A rich estate appears to women
a firm and lasting fact; to a merchant, one easily created out of any
materials, and easily lost.  An orchard, good tillage, good grounds,
seem a fixture, like a gold mine, or a river, to a citizen; but to a
large farmer, not much more fixed than the state of the crop.  Nature
looks provokingly stable and secular, but it has a cause like all the
rest; and when once I comprehend that, will these fields stretch so
immovably wide, these leaves hang so individually considerable?
Permanence is a word of degrees.  Every thing is medial.  Moons are
no more bounds to spiritual power than bat-balls.

        The key to every man is his thought.  Sturdy and defying though
he look, he has a helm which he obeys, which is the idea after which
all his facts are classified.  He can only be reformed by showing him
a new idea which commands his own.  The life of man is a
self-evolving circle, which, from a ring imperceptibly small, rushes
on all sides outwards to new and larger circles, and that without
end.  The extent to which this generation of circles, wheel without
wheel, will go, depends on the force or truth of the individual soul.
For it is the inert effort of each thought, having formed itself into
a circular wave of circumstance, -- as, for instance, an empire,
rules of an art, a local usage, a religious rite, -- to heap itself
on that ridge, and to solidify and hem in the life.  But if the soul
is quick and strong, it bursts over that boundary on all sides, and
expands another orbit on the great deep, which also runs up into a
high wave, with attempt again to stop and to bind.  But the heart
refuses to be imprisoned; in its first and narrowest pulses, it
already tends outward with a vast force, and to immense and
innumerable expansions.

        Every ultimate fact is only the first of a new series.  Every
general law only a particular fact of some more general law presently
to disclose itself.  There is no outside, no inclosing wall, no
circumference to us.  The man finishes his story, -- how good! how
final! how it puts a new face on all things!  He fills the sky.  Lo!
on the other side rises also a man, and draws a circle around the
circle we had just pronounced the outline of the sphere.  Then
already is our first speaker not man, but only a first speaker.  His
only redress is forthwith to draw a circle outside of his antagonist.
And so men do by themselves.  The result of to-day, which haunts the
mind and cannot be escaped, will presently be abridged into a word,
and the principle that seemed to explain nature will itself be
included as one example of a bolder generalization.  In the thought
of to-morrow there is a power to upheave all thy creed, all the
creeds, all the literatures, of the nations, and marshal thee to a
heaven which no epic dream has yet depicted.  Every man is not so
much a workman in the world, as he is a suggestion of that he should
be.  Men walk as prophecies of the next age.

        Step by step we scale this mysterious ladder: the steps are
actions; the new prospect is power.  Every several result is
threatened and judged by that which follows.  Every one seems to be
contradicted by the new; it is only limited by the new.  The new
statement is always hated by the old, and, to those dwelling in the
old, comes like an abyss of skepticism.  But the eye soon gets wonted
to it, for the eye and it are effects of one cause; then its
innocency and benefit appear, and presently, all its energy spent, it
pales and dwindles before the revelation of the new hour.

        Fear not the new generalization.  Does the fact look crass and
material, threatening to degrade thy theory of spirit?  Resist it
not; it goes to refine and raise thy theory of matter just as much.

        There are no fixtures to men, if we appeal to consciousness.
Every man supposes himself not to be fully understood; and if there
is any truth in him, if he rests at last on the divine soul, I see
not how it can be otherwise.  The last chamber, the last closet, he
must feel, was never opened; there is always a residuum unknown,
unanalyzable.  That is, every man believes that he has a greater
possibility.

        Our moods do not believe in each other.  To-day I am full of
thoughts, and can write what I please.  I see no reason why I should
not have the same thought, the same power of expression, to-morrow.
What I write, whilst I write it, seems the most natural thing in the
world; but yesterday I saw a dreary vacuity in this direction in
which now I see so much; and a month hence, I doubt not, I shall
wonder who he was that wrote so many continuous pages.  Alas for this
infirm faith, this will not strenuous, this vast ebb of a vast flow!
I am God in nature; I am a weed by the wall.

        The continual effort to raise himself above himself, to work a
pitch above his last height, betrays itself in a man's relations.  We
thirst for approbation, yet cannot forgive the approver.  The sweet
of nature is love; yet, if I have a friend, I am tormented by my
imperfections.  The love of me accuses the other party.  If he were
high enough to slight me, then could I love him, and rise by my
affection to new heights.  A man's growth is seen in the successive
choirs of his friends.  For every friend whom he loses for truth, he
gains a better.  I thought, as I walked in the woods and mused on my
friends, why should I play with them this game of idolatry?  I know
and see too well, when not voluntarily blind, the speedy limits of
persons called high and worthy.  Rich, noble, and great they are by
the liberality of our speech, but truth is sad.  O blessed Spirit,
whom I forsake for these, they are not thou!  Every personal
consideration that we allow costs us heavenly state.  We sell the
thrones of angels for a short and turbulent pleasure.

        How often must we learn this lesson?  Men cease to interest us
when we find their limitations.  The only sin is limitation.  As soon
as you once come up with a man's limitations, it is all over with
him.  Has he talents? has he enterprise? has he knowledge? it boots
not.  Infinitely alluring and attractive was he to you yesterday, a
great hope, a sea to swim in; now, you have found his shores, found
it a pond, and you care not if you never see it again.

        Each new step we take in thought reconciles twenty seemingly
discordant facts, as expressions of one law.  Aristotle and Plato are
reckoned the respective heads of two schools.  A wise man will see
that Aristotle Platonizes.  By going one step farther back in
thought, discordant opinions are reconciled, by being seen to be two
extremes of one principle, and we can never go so far back as to
preclude a still higher vision.

        Beware when the great God lets loose a thinker on this planet.
Then all things are at risk.  It is as when a conflagration has
broken out in a great city, and no man knows what is safe, or where
it will end.  There is not a piece of science, but its flank may be
turned to-morrow; there is not any literary reputation, not the
so-called eternal names of fame, that may not be revised and
condemned.  The very hopes of man, the thoughts of his heart, the
religion of nations, the manners and morals of mankind, are all at
the mercy of a new generalization.  Generalization is always a new
influx of the divinity into the mind.  Hence the thrill that attends
it.

        Valor consists in the power of self-recovery, so that a man
cannot have his flank turned, cannot be out-generalled, but put him
where you will, he stands.  This can only be by his preferring truth
to his past apprehension of truth; and his alert acceptance of it,
from whatever quarter; the intrepid conviction that his laws, his
relations to society, his Christianity, his world, may at any time be
superseded and decease.

        There are degrees in idealism.  We learn first to play with it
academically, as the magnet was once a toy.  Then we see in the
heyday of youth and poetry that it may be true, that it is true in
gleams and fragments.  Then, its countenance waxes stern and grand,
and we see that it must be true.  It now shows itself ethical and
practical.  We learn that God IS that he is in me; and that all
things are shadows of him.  The idealism of Berkeley is only a crude
statement of the idealism of Jesus, and that again is a crude
statement of the fact, that all nature is the rapid efflux of
goodness executing and organizing itself.  Much more obviously is
history and the state of the world at any one time directly dependent
on the intellectual classification then existing in the minds of men.
The things which are dear to men at this hour are so on account of
the ideas which have emerged on their mental horizon, and which cause
the present order of things as a tree bears its apples.  A new degree
of culture would instantly revolutionize the entire system of human
pursuits.

        Conversation is a game of circles.  In conversation we pluck up
the _termini_ which bound the common of silence on every side.  The
parties are not to be judged by the spirit they partake and even
express under this Pentecost.  To-morrow they will have receded from
this high-water mark.  To-morrow you shall find them stooping under
the old pack-saddles.  Yet let us enjoy the cloven flame whilst it
glows on our walls.  When each new speaker strikes a new light,
emancipates us from the oppression of the last speaker, to oppress us
with the greatness and exclusiveness of his own thought, then yields
us to another redeemer, we seem to recover our rights, to become men.
O, what truths profound and executable only in ages and orbs are
supposed in the announcement of every truth!  In common hours,
society sits cold and statuesque.  We all stand waiting, empty, --
knowing, possibly, that we can be full, surrounded by mighty symbols
which are not symbols to us, but prose and trivial toys.  Then cometh
the god, and converts the statues into fiery men, and by a flash of
his eye burns up the veil which shrouded all things, and the meaning
of the very furniture, of cup and saucer, of chair and clock and
tester, is manifest.  The facts which loomed so large in the fogs of
yesterday, -- property, climate, breeding, personal beauty, and the
like, have strangely changed their proportions.  All that we reckoned
settled shakes and rattles; and literatures, cities, climates,
religions, leave their foundations, and dance before our eyes.  And
yet here again see the swift circumspection!  Good as is discourse,
silence is better, and shames it.  The length of the discourse
indicates the distance of thought betwixt the speaker and the hearer.
If they were at a perfect understanding in any part, no words would
be necessary thereon.  If at one in all parts, no words would be
suffered.

        Literature is a point outside of our hodiernal circle, through
which a new one may be described.  The use of literature is to afford
us a platform whence we may command a view of our present life, a
purchase by which we may move it.  We fill ourselves with ancient
learning, install ourselves the best we can in Greek, in Punic, in
Roman houses, only that we may wiselier see French, English, and
American houses and modes of living.  In like manner, we see
literature best from the midst of wild nature, or from the din of
affairs, or from a high religion.  The field cannot be well seen from
within the field.  The astronomer must have his diameter of the
earth's orbit as a base to find the parallax of any star.

        Therefore we value the poet.  All the argument and all the
wisdom is not in the encyclopaedia, or the treatise on metaphysics,
or the Body of Divinity, but in the sonnet or the play.  In my daily
work I incline to repeat my old steps, and do not believe in remedial
force, in the power of change and reform.  But some Petrarch or
Ariosto, filled with the new wine of his imagination, writes me an
ode or a brisk romance, full of daring thought and action.  He smites
and arouses me with his shrill tones, breaks up my whole chain of
habits, and I open my eye on my own possibilities.  He claps wings to
the sides of all the solid old lumber of the world, and I am capable
once more of choosing a straight path in theory and practice.

        We have the same need to command a view of the religion of the
world.  We can never see Christianity from the catechism: -- from the
pastures, from a boat in the pond, from amidst the songs of
wood-birds, we possibly may.  Cleansed by the elemental light and
wind, steeped in the sea of beautiful forms which the field offers
us, we may chance to cast a right glance back upon biography.
Christianity is rightly dear to the best of mankind; yet was there
never a young philosopher whose breeding had fallen into the
Christian church, by whom that brave text of Paul's was not specially
prized: -- "Then shall also the Son be subject unto Him who put all
things under him, that God may be all in all." Let the claims and
virtues of persons be never so great and welcome, the instinct of man
presses eagerly onward to the impersonal and illimitable, and gladly
arms itself against the dogmatism of bigots with this generous word
out of the book itself.

        The natural world may be conceived of as a system of concentric
circles, and we now and then detect in nature slight dislocations,
which apprize us that this surface on which we now stand is not
fixed, but sliding.  These manifold tenacious qualities, this
chemistry and vegetation, these metals and animals, which seem to
stand there for their own sake, are means and methods only, -- are
words of God, and as fugitive as other words.  Has the naturalist or
chemist learned his craft, who has explored the gravity of atoms and
the elective affinities, who has not yet discerned the deeper law
whereof this is only a partial or approximate statement, namely, that
like draws to like; and that the goods which belong to you gravitate
to you, and need not be pursued with pains and cost?  Yet is that
statement approximate also, and not final.  Omnipresence is a higher
fact.  Not through subtle, subterranean channels need friend and fact
be drawn to their counterpart, but, rightly considered, these things
proceed from the eternal generation of the soul.  Cause and effect
are two sides of one fact.

        The same law of eternal procession ranges all that we call the
virtues, and extinguishes each in the light of a better.  The great
man will not be prudent in the popular sense; all his prudence will
be so much deduction from his grandeur.  But it behooves each to see,
when he sacrifices prudence, to what god he devotes it; if to ease
and pleasure, he had better be prudent still; if to a great trust, he
can well spare his mule and panniers who has a winged chariot
instead.  Geoffrey draws on his boots to go through the woods, that
his feet may be safer from the bite of snakes; Aaron never thinks of
such a peril.  In many years neither is harmed by such an accident.
Yet it seems to me, that, with every precaution you take against such
an evil, you put yourself into the power of the evil.  I suppose that
the highest prudence is the lowest prudence.  Is this too sudden a
rushing from the centre to the verge of our orbit?  Think how many
times we shall fall back into pitiful calculations before we take up
our rest in the great sentiment, or make the verge of to-day the new
centre.  Besides, your bravest sentiment is familiar to the humblest
men.  The poor and the low have their way of expressing the last
facts of philosophy as well as you.  "Blessed be nothing," and "the
worse things are, the better they are," are proverbs which express
the transcendentalism of common life.

        One man's justice is another's injustice; one man's beauty,
another's ugliness; one man's wisdom, another's folly; as one beholds
the same objects from a higher point.  One man thinks justice
consists in paying debts, and has no measure in his abhorrence of
another who is very remiss in this duty, and makes the creditor wait
tediously.  But that second man has his own way of looking at things;
asks himself which debt must I pay first, the debt to the rich, or
the debt to the poor? the debt of money, or the debt of thought to
mankind, of genius to nature?  For you, O broker! there is no other
principle but arithmetic.  For me, commerce is of trivial import;
love, faith, truth of character, the aspiration of man, these are
sacred; nor can I detach one duty, like you, from all other duties,
and concentrate my forces mechanically on the payment of moneys.  Let
me live onward; you shall find that, though slower, the progress of
my character will liquidate all these debts without injustice to
higher claims.  If a man should dedicate himself to the payment of
notes, would not this be injustice?  Does he owe no debt but money?
And are all claims on him to be postponed to a landlord's or a
banker's?

        There is no virtue which is final; all are initial.  The
virtues of society are vices of the saint.  The terror of reform is
the discovery that we must cast away our virtues, or what we have
always esteemed such, into the same pit that has consumed our grosser
vices.

        "Forgive his crimes, forgive his virtues too,
        Those smaller faults, half converts to the right."

        It is the highest power of divine moments that they abolish our
contritions also.  I accuse myself of sloth and unprofitableness day
by day; but when these waves of God flow into me, I no longer reckon
lost time.  I no longer poorly compute my possible achievement by
what remains to me of the month or the year; for these moments confer
a sort of omnipresence and omnipotence which asks nothing of
duration, but sees that the energy of the mind is commensurate with
the work to be done, without time.

        And thus, O circular philosopher, I hear some reader exclaim,
you have arrived at a fine Pyrrhonism, at an equivalence and
indifferency of all actions, and would fain teach us that, _if we are
true_, forsooth, our crimes may be lively stones out of which we
shall construct the temple of the true God!

        I am not careful to justify myself.  I own I am gladdened by
seeing the predominance of the saccharine principle throughout
vegetable nature, and not less by beholding in morals that
unrestrained inundation of the principle of good into every chink and
hole that selfishness has left open, yea, into selfishness and sin
itself; so that no evil is pure, nor hell itself without its extreme
satisfactions.  But lest I should mislead any when I have my own head
and obey my whims, let me remind the reader that I am only an
experimenter.  Do not set the least value on what I do, or the least
discredit on what I do not, as if I pretended to settle any thing as
true or false.  I unsettle all things.  No facts are to me sacred;
none are profane; I simply experiment, an endless seeker, with no
Past at my back.

        Yet this incessant movement and progression which all things
partake could never become sensible to us but by contrast to some
principle of fixture or stability in the soul.  Whilst the eternal
generation of circles proceeds, the eternal generator abides.  That
central life is somewhat superior to creation, superior to knowledge
and thought, and contains all its circles.  For ever it labors to
create a life and thought as large and excellent as itself; but in
vain; for that which is made instructs how to make a better.

        Thus there is no sleep, no pause, no preservation, but all
things renew, germinate, and spring.  Why should we import rags and
relics into the new hour?  Nature abhors the old, and old age seems
the only disease; all others run into this one.  We call it by many
names, -- fever, intemperance, insanity, stupidity, and crime; they
are all forms of old age; they are rest, conservatism, appropriation,
inertia, not newness, not the way onward.  We grizzle every day.  I
see no need of it.  Whilst we converse with what is above us, we do
not grow old, but grow young.  Infancy, youth, receptive, aspiring,
with religious eye looking upward, counts itself nothing, and
abandons itself to the instruction flowing from all sides.  But the
man and woman of seventy assume to know all, they have outlived their
hope, they renounce aspiration, accept the actual for the necessary,
and talk down to the young.  Let them, then, become organs of the
Holy Ghost; let them be lovers; let them behold truth; and their eyes
are uplifted, their wrinkles smoothed, they are perfumed again with
hope and power.  This old age ought not to creep on a human mind.  In
nature every moment is new; the past is always swallowed and
forgotten; the coming only is sacred.  Nothing is secure but life,
transition, the energizing spirit.  No love can be bound by oath or
covenant to secure it against a higher love.  No truth so sublime but
it may be trivial to-morrow in the light of new thoughts.  People
wish to be settled; only as far as they are unsettled is there any
hope for them.

        Life is a series of surprises.  We do not guess to-day the
mood, the pleasure, the power of to-morrow, when we are building up
our being.  Of lower states, -- of acts of routine and sense, -- we
can tell somewhat; but the masterpieces of God, the total growths and
universal movements of the soul, he hideth; they are incalculable.  I
can know that truth is divine and helpful; but how it shall help me I
can have no guess, for _so to be_ is the sole inlet of _so to know._
The new position of the advancing man has all the powers of the old,
yet has them all new.  It carries in its bosom all the energies of
the past, yet is itself an exhalation of the morning.  I cast away in
this new moment all my once hoarded knowledge, as vacant and vain.
Now, for the first time, seem I to know any thing rightly.  The
simplest words, -- we do not know what they mean, except when we love
and aspire.

        The difference between talents and character is adroitness to
keep the old and trodden round, and power and courage to make a new
road to new and better goals.  Character makes an overpowering
present; a cheerful, determined hour, which fortifies all the
company, by making them see that much is possible and excellent that
was not thought of.  Character dulls the impression of particular
events.  When we see the conqueror, we do not think much of any one
battle or success.  We see that we had exaggerated the difficulty.
It was easy to him.  The great man is not convulsible or tormentable;
events pass over him without much impression.  People say sometimes,
`See what I have overcome; see how cheerful I am; see how completely
I have triumphed over these black events.' Not if they still remind
me of the black event.  True conquest is the causing the calamity to
fade and disappear, as an early cloud of insignificant result in a
history so large and advancing.

 
        The one thing which we seek with insatiable desire is to forget
ourselves, to be surprised out of our propriety, to lose our
sempiternal memory, and to do something without knowing how or why;
in short, to draw a new circle.  Nothing great was ever achieved
without enthusiasm.  The way of life is wonderful: it is by
abandonment.  The great moments of history are the facilities of
performance through the strength of ideas, as the works of genius and
religion.  "A man," said Oliver Cromwell, "never rises so high as
when he knows not whither he is going." Dreams and drunkenness, the
use of opium and alcohol are the semblance and counterfeit of this
oracular genius, and hence their dangerous attraction for men.  For
the like reason, they ask the aid of wild passions, as in gaming and
war, to ape in some manner these flames and generosities of the heart
 
        INTELLECT
 
 
        Go, speed the stars of Thought
        On to their shining goals; --
        The sower scatters broad his seed,
        The wheat thou strew'st be souls.
 
 
 
        ESSAY XI _Intellect_
 
        Every substance is negatively electric to that which stands
above it in th chemical tables, positively to that which stands below
it.  Water dissolves wood, and iron, and salt; air dissolves water;
electric fire dissolves air, but the intellect dissolves fire,
gravity, laws, method, and the subtlest unnamed relations of nature,
in its resistless menstruum.  Intellect lies behind genius, which is
intellect constructive.  Intellect is the simple power anterior to
all action or construction.  Gladly would I unfold in calm degrees a
natural history of the intellect, but what man has yet been able to
mark the steps and boundaries of that transparent essence?  The first
questions are always to be asked, and the wisest doctor is gravelled
by the inquisitiveness of a child.  How can we speak of the action of
the mind under any divisions, as of its knowledge, of its ethics, of
its works, and so forth, since it melts will into perception,
knowledge into act?  Each becomes the other.  Itself alone is.  Its
vision is not like the vision of the eye, but is union with the
things known.

        Intellect and intellection signify to the common ear
consideration of abstract truth.  The considerations of time and
place, of you and me, of profit and hurt, tyrannize over most men's
minds.  Intellect separates the fact considered from _you_, from all
local and personal reference, and discerns it as if it existed for
its own sake.  Heraclitus looked upon the affections as dense and
colored mists.  In the fog of good and evil affections, it is hard
for man to walk forward in a straight line.  Intellect is void of
affection, and sees an object as it stands in the light of science,
cool and disengaged.  The intellect goes out of the individual,
floats over its own personality, and regards it as a fact, and not as
_I_ and _mine_.  He who is immersed in what concerns person or place
cannot see the problem of existence.  This the intellect always
ponders.  Nature shows all things formed and bound.  The intellect
pierces the form, overleaps the wall, detects intrinsic likeness
between remote things, and reduces all things into a few principles.

 
        The making a fact the subject of thought raises it.  All that
mass of mental and moral phenomena, which we do not make objects of
voluntary thought, come within the power of fortune; they constitute
the circumstance of daily life; they are subject to change, to fear,
and hope.  Every man beholds his human condition with a degree of
melancholy.  As a ship aground is battered by the waves, so man,
imprisoned in mortal life, lies open to the mercy of coming events.
But a truth, separated by the intellect, is no longer a subject of
destiny.  We behold it as a god upraised above care and fear.  And so
any fact in our life, or any record of our fancies or reflections,
disentangled from the web of our unconsciousness, becomes an object
impersonal and immortal.  It is the past restored, but embalmed.  A
better art than that of Egypt has taken fear and corruption out of
it.  It is eviscerated of care.  It is offered for science.  What is
addressed to us for contemplation does not threaten us, but makes us
intellectual beings.

        The growth of the intellect is spontaneous in every expansion.
The mind that grows could not predict the times, the means, the mode
of that spontaneity.  God enters by a private door into every
individual.  Long prior to the age of reflection is the thinking of
the mind.  Out of darkness, it came insensibly into the marvellous
light of to-day.  In the period of infancy it accepted and disposed
of all impressions from the surrounding creation after its own way.
Whatever any mind doth or saith is after a law; and this native law
remains over it after it has come to reflection or conscious thought.
In the most worn, pedantic, introverted self-tormenter's life, the
greatest part is incalculable by him, unforeseen, unimaginable, and
must be, until he can take himself up by his own ears.  What am I?
What has my will done to make me that I am?  Nothing.  I have been
floated into this thought, this hour, this connection of events, by
secret currents of might and mind, and my ingenuity and wilfulness
have not thwarted, have not aided to an appreciable degree.

        Our spontaneous action is always the best.  You cannot, with
your best deliberation and heed, come so close to any question as
your spontaneous glance shall bring you, whilst you rise from your
bed, or walk abroad in the morning after meditating the matter before
sleep on the previous night.  Our thinking is a pious reception.  Our
truth of thought is therefore vitiated as much by too violent
direction given by our will, as by too great negligence.  We do not
determine what we will think.  We only open our senses, clear away,
as we can, all obstruction from the fact, and suffer the intellect to
see.  We have little control over our thoughts.  We are the prisoners
of ideas.  They catch us up for moments into their heaven, and so
fully engage us, that we take no thought for the morrow, gaze like
children, without an effort to make them our own.  By and by we fall
out of that rapture, bethink us where we have been, what we have
seen, and repeat, as truly as we can, what we have beheld.  As far as
we can recall these ecstasies, we carry away in the ineffaceable
memory the result, and all men and all the ages confirm it.  It is
called Truth.  But the moment we cease to report, and attempt to
correct and contrive, it is not truth.

        If we consider what persons have stimulated and profited us, we
shall perceive the superiority of the spontaneous or intuitive
principle over the arithmetical or logical.  The first contains the
second, but virtual and latent.  We want, in every man, a long logic;
we cannot pardon the absence of it, but it must not be spoken.  Logic
is the procession or proportionate unfolding of the intuition; but
its virtue is as silent method; the moment it would appear as
propositions, and have a separate value, it is worthless.

        In every man's mind, some images, words, and facts remain,
without effort on his part to imprint them, which others forget, and
afterwards these illustrate to him important laws.  All our progress
is an unfolding, like the vegetable bud.  You have first an instinct,
then an opinion, then a knowledge, as the plant has root, bud, and
fruit.  Trust the instinct to the end, though you can render no
reason.  It is vain to hurry it.  By trusting it to the end, it shall
ripen into truth, and you shall know why you believe.

        Each mind has its own method.  A true man never acquires after
college rules.  What you have aggregated in a natural manner
surprises and delights when it is produced.  For we cannot oversee
each other's secret.  And hence the differences between men in
natural endowment are insignificant in comparison with their common
wealth.  Do you think the porter and the cook have no anecdotes, no
experiences, no wonders for you?  Every body knows as much as the
savant.  The walls of rude minds are scrawled all over with facts,
with thoughts.  They shall one day bring a lantern and read the
inscriptions.  Every man, in the degree in which he has wit and
culture, finds his curiosity inflamed concerning the modes of living
and thinking of other men, and especially of those classes whose
minds have not been subdued by the drill of school education.

        This instinctive action never ceases in a healthy mind, but
becomes richer and more frequent in its informations through all
states of culture.  At last comes the era of reflection, when we not
only observe, but take pains to observe; when we of set purpose sit
down to consider an abstract truth; when we keep the mind's eye open,
whilst we converse, whilst we read, whilst we act, intent to learn
the secret law of some class of facts.

        What is the hardest task in the world?  To think.  I would put
myself in the attitude to look in the eye an abstract truth, and I
cannot.  I blench and withdraw on this side and on that.  I seem to
know what he meant who said, No man can see God face to face and
live.  For example, a man explores the basis of civil government.
Let him intend his mind without respite, without rest, in one
direction.  His best heed long time avails him nothing.  Yet thoughts
are flitting before him.  We all but apprehend, we dimly forebode the
truth.  We say, I will walk abroad, and the truth will take form and
clearness to me.  We go forth, but cannot find it.  It seems as if we
needed only the stillness and composed attitude of the library to
seize the thought.  But we come in, and are as far from it as at
first.  Then, in a moment, and unannounced, the truth appears.  A
certain, wandering light appears, and is the distinction, the
principle, we wanted.  But the oracle comes, because we had
previously laid siege to the shrine.  It seems as if the law of the
intellect resembled that law of nature by which we now inspire, now
expire the breath; by which the heart now draws in, then hurls out
the blood, -- the law of undulation.  So now you must labor with your
brains, and now you must forbear your activity, and see what the
great Soul showeth.

 
        The immortality of man is as legitimately preached from the
intellections as from the moral volitions.  Every intellection is
mainly prospective.  Its present value is its least.  Inspect what
delights you in Plutarch, in Shakspeare, in Cervantes.  Each truth
that a writer acquires is a lantern, which he turns full on what
facts and thoughts lay already in his mind, and behold, all the mats
and rubbish which had littered his garret become precious.  Every
trivial fact in his private biography becomes an illustration of this
new principle, revisits the day, and delights all men by its piquancy
and new charm.  Men say, Where did he get this? and think there was
something divine in his life.  But no; they have myriads of facts
just as good, would they only get a lamp to ransack their attics
withal.

        We are all wise.  The difference between persons is not in
wisdom but in art.  I knew, in an academical club, a person who
always deferred to me, who, seeing my whim for writing, fancied that
my experiences had somewhat superior; whilst I saw that his
experiences were as good as mine.  Give them to me, and I would make
the same use of them.  He held the old; he holds the new; I had the
habit of tacking together the old and the new, which he did not use
to exercise.  This may hold in the great examples.  Perhaps if we
should meet Shakspeare, we should not be conscious of any steep
inferiority; no: but of a great equality, -- only that he possessed a
strange skill of using, of classifying, his facts, which we lacked.
For, notwithstanding our utter incapacity to produce any thing like
Hamlet and Othello, see the perfect reception this wit, and immense
knowledge of life, and liquid eloquence find in us all.

        If you gather apples in the sunshine, or make hay, or hoe corn,
and then retire within doors, and shut your eyes, and press them with
your hand, you shall still see apples hanging in the bright light,
with boughs and leaves thereto, or the tasselled grass, or the
corn-flags, and this for five or six hours afterwards.  There lie the
impressions on the retentive organ, though you knew it not.  So lies
the whole series of natural images with which your life has made you
acquainted in your memory, though you know it not, and a thrill of
passion flashes light on their dark chamber, and the active power
seizes instantly the fit image, as the word of its momentary thought.

        It is long ere we discover how rich we are.  Our history, we
are sure, is quite tame: we have nothing to write, nothing to infer.
But our wiser years still run back to the despised recollections of
childhood, and always we are fishing up some wonderful article out of
that pond; until, by and by, we begin to suspect that the biography
of the one foolish person we know is, in reality, nothing less than
the miniature paraphrase of the hundred volumes of the Universal
History.

        In the intellect constructive, which we popularly designate by
the word Genius, we observe the same balance of two elements as in
intellect receptive.  The constructive intellect produces thoughts,
sentences, poems, plans, designs, systems.  It is the generation of
the mind, the marriage of thought with nature.  To genius must always
go two gifts, the thought and the publication.  The first is
revelation, always a miracle, which no frequency of occurrence or
incessant study can ever familiarize, but which must always leave the
inquirer stupid with wonder.  It is the advent of truth into the
world, a form of thought now, for the first time, bursting into the
universe, a child of the old eternal soul, a piece of genuine and
immeasurable greatness.  It seems, for the time, to inherit all that
has yet existed, and to dictate to the unborn.  It affects every
thought of man, and goes to fashion every institution.  But to make
it available, it needs a vehicle or art by which it is conveyed to
men.  To be communicable, it must become picture or sensible object.
We must learn the language of facts.  The most wonderful inspirations
die with their subject, if he has no hand to paint them to the
senses.  The ray of light passes invisible through space, and only
when it falls on an object is it seen.  When the spiritual energy is
directed on something outward, then it is a thought.  The relation
between it and you first makes you, the value of you, apparent to me.
The rich, inventive genius of the painter must be smothered and lost
for want of the power of drawing, and in our happy hours we should be
inexhaustible poets, if once we could break through the silence into
adequate rhyme.  As all men have some access to primary truth, so all
have some art or power of communication in their head, but only in
the artist does it descend into the hand.  There is an inequality,
whose laws we do not yet know, between two men and between two
moments of the same man, in respect to this faculty.  In common
hours, we have the same facts as in the uncommon or inspired, but
they do not sit for their portraits; they are not detached, but lie
in a web.  The thought of genius is spontaneous; but the power of
picture or expression, in the most enriched and flowing nature,
implies a mixture of will, a certain control over the spontaneous
states, without which no production is possible.  It is a conversion
of all nature into the rhetoric of thought, under the eye of
judgment, with a strenuous exercise of choice.  And yet the
imaginative vocabulary seems to be spontaneous also.  It does not
flow from experience only or mainly, but from a richer source.  Not
by any conscious imitation of particular forms are the grand strokes
of the painter executed, but by repairing to the fountain-head of all
forms in his mind.  Who is the first drawing-master?  Without
instruction we know very well the ideal of the human form.  A child
knows if an arm or a leg be distorted in a picture, if the attitude
be natural or grand, or mean, though he has never received any
instruction in drawing, or heard any conversation on the subject, nor
can himself draw with correctness a single feature.  A good form
strikes all eyes pleasantly, long before they have any science on the
subject, and a beautiful face sets twenty hearts in palpitation,
prior to all consideration of the mechanical proportions of the
features and head.  We may owe to dreams some light on the fountain
of this skill; for, as soon as we let our will go, and let the
unconscious states ensue, see what cunning draughtsmen we are!  We
entertain ourselves with wonderful forms of men, of women, of
animals, of gardens, of woods, and of monsters, and the mystic pencil
wherewith we then draw has no awkwardness or inexperience, no
meagreness or poverty; it can design well, and group well; its
composition is full of art, its colors are well laid on, and the
whole canvas which it paints is life-like, and apt to touch us with
terror, with tenderness, with desire, and with grief.  Neither are
the artist's copies from experience ever mere copies, but always
touched and softened by tints from this ideal domain.

        The conditions essential to a constructive mind do not appear
to be so often combined but that a good sentence or verse remains
fresh and memorable for a long time.  Yet when we write with ease,
and come out into the free air of thought, we seem to be assured that
nothing is easier than to continue this communication at pleasure.
Up, down, around, the kingdom of thought has no inclosures, but the
Muse makes us free of her city.  Well, the world has a million
writers.  One would think, then, that good thought would be as
familiar as air and water, and the gifts of each new hour would
exclude the last.  Yet we can count all our good books; nay, I
remember any beautiful verse for twenty years.  It is true that the
discerning intellect of the world is always much in advance of the
creative, so that there are many competent judges of the best book,
and few writers of the best books.  But some of the conditions of
intellectual construction are of rare occurrence.  The intellect is a
whole, and demands integrity in every work.  This is resisted equally
by a man's devotion to a single thought, and by his ambition to
combine too many.

        Truth is our element of life, yet if a man fasten his attention
on a single aspect of truth, and apply himself to that alone for a
long time, the truth becomes distorted and not itself, but falsehood;
herein resembling the air, which is our natural element, and the
breath of our nostrils, but if a stream of the same be directed on
the body for a time, it causes cold, fever, and even death.  How
wearisome the grammarian, the phrenologist, the political or
religious fanatic, or indeed any possessed mortal whose balance is
lost by the exaggeration of a single topic.  It is incipient
insanity.  Every thought is a prison also.  I cannot see what you
see, because I am caught up by a strong wind, and blown so far in one
direction that I am out of the hoop of your horizon.

        Is it any better, if the student, to avoid this offence, and to
liberalize himself, aims to make a mechanical whole of history, or
science, or philosophy, by a numerical addition of all the facts that
fall within his vision?  The world refuses to be analyzed by addition
and subtraction.  When we are young, we spend much time and pains in
filling our note-books with all definitions of Religion, Love,
Poetry, Politics, Art, in the hope that, in the course of a few
years, we shall have condensed into our encyclopaedia the net value
of all the theories at which the world has yet arrived.  But year
after year our tables get no completeness, and at last we discover
that our curve is a parabola, whose arcs will never meet.

        Neither by detachment, neither by aggregation, is the integrity
of the intellect transmitted to its works, but by a vigilance which
brings the intellect in its greatness and best state to operate every
moment.  It must have the same wholeness which nature has.  Although
no diligence can rebuild the universe in a model, by the best
accumulation or disposition of details, yet does the world reappear
in miniature in every event, so that all the laws of nature may be
read in the smallest fact.  The intellect must have the like
perfection in its apprehension and in its works.  For this reason, an
index or mercury of intellectual proficiency is the perception of
identity.  We talk with accomplished persons who appear to be
strangers in nature.  The cloud, the tree, the turf, the bird are not
theirs, have nothing of them: the world is only their lodging and
table.  But the poet, whose verses are to be spheral and complete, is
one whom Nature cannot deceive, whatsoever face of strangeness she
may put on.  He feels a strict consanguinity, and detects more
likeness than variety in all her changes.  We are stung by the desire
for new thought; but when we receive a new thought, it is only the
old thought with a new face, and though we make it our own, we
instantly crave another; we are not really enriched.  For the truth
was in us before it was reflected to us from natural objects; and the
profound genius will cast the likeness of all creatures into every
product of his wit.

        But if the constructive powers are rare, and it is given to few
men to be poets, yet every man is a receiver of this descending holy
ghost, and may well study the laws of its influx.  Exactly parallel
is the whole rule of intellectual duty to the rule of moral duty.  A
self-denial, no less austere than the saint's, is demanded of the
scholar.  He must worship truth, and forego all things for that, and
choose defeat and pain, so that his treasure in thought is thereby
augmented.

        God offers to every mind its choice between truth and repose.
Take which you please, -- you can never have both.  Between these, as
a pendulum, man oscillates.  He in whom the love of repose
predominates will accept the first creed, the first philosophy, the
first political party he meets, -- most likely his father's.  He gets
rest, commodity, and reputation; but he shuts the door of truth.  He
in whom the love of truth predominates will keep himself aloof from
all moorings, and afloat.  He will abstain from dogmatism, and
recognize all the opposite negations, between which, as walls, his
being is swung.  He submits to the inconvenience of suspense and
imperfect opinion, but he is a candidate for truth, as the other is
not, and respects the highest law of his being.

        The circle of the green earth he must measure with his shoes,
to find the man who can yield him truth.  He shall then know that
there is somewhat more blessed and great in hearing than in speaking.
Happy is the hearing man; unhappy the speaking man.  As long as I
hear truth, I am bathed by a beautiful element, and am not conscious
of any limits to my nature.  The suggestions are thousandfold that I
hear and see.  The waters of the great deep have ingress and egress
to the soul.  But if I speak, I define, I confine, and am less.  When
Socrates speaks, Lysis and Menexenus are afflicted by no shame that
they do not speak.  They also are good.  He likewise defers to them,
loves them, whilst he speaks.  Because a true and natural man
contains and is the same truth which an eloquent man articulates: but
in the eloquent man, because he can articulate it, it seems something
the less to reside, and he turns to these silent beautiful with the
more inclination and respect.  The ancient sentence said, Let us be
silent, for so are the gods.  Silence is a solvent that destroys
personality, and gives us leave to be great and universal.  Every
man's progress is through a succession of teachers, each of whom
seems at the time to have a superlative influence, but it at last
gives place to a new.  Frankly let him accept it all.  Jesus says,
Leave father, mother, house and lands, and follow me.  Who leaves
all, receives more.  This is as true intellectually as morally.  Each
new mind we approach seems to require an abdication of all our past
and present possessions.  A new doctrine seems, at first, a
subversion of all our opinions, tastes, and manner of living.  Such
has Swedenborg, such has Kant, such has Coleridge, such has Hegel or
his interpreter Cousin, seemed to many young men in this country.
Take thankfully and heartily all they can give.  Exhaust them,
wrestle with them, let them not go until their blessing be won, and,
after a short season, the dismay will be overpast, the excess of
influence withdrawn, and they will be no longer an alarming meteor,
but one more bright star shining serenely in your heaven, and
blending its light with all your day.

        But whilst he gives himself up unreservedly to that which draws
him, because that is his own, he is to refuse himself to that which
draws him not, whatsoever fame and authority may attend it, because
it is not his own.  Entire self-reliance belongs to the intellect.
One soul is a counterpoise of all souls, as a capillary column of
water is a balance for the sea.  It must treat things, and books, and
sovereign genius, as itself also a sovereign.  If Aeschylus be that
man he is taken for, he has not yet done his office, when he has
educated the learned of Europe for a thousand years.  He is now to
approve himself a master of delight to me also.  If he cannot do
that, all his fame shall avail him nothing with me.  I were a fool
not to sacrifice a thousand Aeschyluses to my intellectual integrity.
Especially take the same ground in regard to abstract truth, the
science of the mind.  The Bacon, the Spinoza, the Hume, Schelling,
Kant, or whosoever propounds to you a philosophy of the mind, is only
a more or less awkward translator of things in your consciousness,
which you have also your way of seeing, perhaps of denominating.
Say, then, instead of too timidly poring into his obscure sense, that
he has not succeeded in rendering back to you your consciousness.  He
has not succeeded; now let another try.  If Plato cannot, perhaps
Spinoza will.  If Spinoza cannot, then perhaps Kant.  Anyhow, when at
last it is done, you will find it is no recondite, but a simple,
natural, common state, which the writer restores to you.

        But let us end these didactics.  I will not, though the subject
might provoke it, speak to the open question between Truth and Love.
I shall not presume to interfere in the old politics of the
skies;---- "The cherubim know most; the seraphim love most." The gods
shall settle their own quarrels.  But I cannot recite, even thus
rudely, laws of the intellect, without remembering that lofty and
sequestered class of men who have been its prophets and oracles, the
high-priesthood of the pure reason, the _Trismegisti_, the expounders
of the principles of thought from age to age.  When, at long
intervals, we turn over their abstruse pages, wonderful seems the
calm and grand air of these few, these great spiritual lords, who
have walked in the world, -- these of the old religion, -- dwelling
in a worship which makes the sanctities of Christianity look
_parvenues_ and popular; for "persuasion is in soul, but necessity is
in intellect." This band of grandees, Hermes, Heraclitus, Empedocles,
Plato, Plotinus, Olympiodorus, Proclus, Synesius, and the rest, have
somewhat so vast in their logic, so primary in their thinking, that
it seems antecedent to all the ordinary distinctions of rhetoric and
literature, and to be at once poetry, and music, and dancing, and
astronomy, and mathematics.  I am present at the sowing of the seed
of the world.  With a geometry of sunbeams, the soul lays the
foundations of nature.  The truth and grandeur of their thought is
proved by its scope and applicability, for it commands the entire
schedule and inventory of things for its illustration.  But what
marks its elevation, and has even a comic look to us, is the innocent
serenity with which these babe-like Jupiters sit in their clouds, and
from age to age prattle to each other, and to no contemporary.  Well
assured that their speech is intelligible, and the most natural thing
in the world, they add thesis to thesis, without a moment's heed of
the universal astonishment of the human race below, who do not
comprehend their plainest argument; nor do they ever relent so much
as to insert a popular or explaining sentence; nor testify the least
displeasure or petulance at the dulness of their amazed auditory.
The angels are so enamoured of the language that is spoken in heaven,
that they will not distort their lips with the hissing and unmusical
dialects of men, but speak their own, whether there be any who
understand it or not.

 
 
        ART
 
        Give to barrows, trays, and pans
        Grace and glimmer of romance;
        Bring the moonlight into noon
        Hid in gleaming piles of stone;
        On the city's paved street
        Plant gardens lined with lilac sweet;
        Let spouting fountains cool the air,
        Singing in the sun-baked square;
        Let statue, picture, park, and hall,
        Ballad, flag, and festival,
        The past restore, the day adorn,
        And make each morrow a new morn.
        So shall the drudge in dusty frock
        Spy behind the city clock
        Retinues of airy kings,
        Skirts of angels, starry wings,
        His fathers shining in bright fables,
        His children fed at heavenly tables.
        'T is the privilege of Art
        Thus to play its cheerful part,
        Man in Earth to acclimate,
        And bend the exile to his fate,
        And, moulded of one element
        With the days and firmament,
        Teach him on these as stairs to climb,
        And live on even terms with Time;
        Whilst upper life the slender rill
        Of human sense doth overfill.
 
 
 
        ESSAY XII _Art_

        Because the soul is progressive, it never quite repeats itself,
but in every act attempts the production of a new and fairer whole.
This appears in works both of the useful and the fine arts, if we
employ the popular distinction of works according to their aim,
either at use or beauty.  Thus in our fine arts, not imitation, but
creation is the aim.  In landscapes, the painter should give the
suggestion of a fairer creation than we know.  The details, the prose
of nature he should omit, and give us only the spirit and splendor.
He should know that the landscape has beauty for his eye, because it
expresses a thought which is to him good: and this, because the same
power which sees through his eyes, is seen in that spectacle; and he
will come to value the expression of nature, and not nature itself,
and so exalt in his copy, the features that please him.  He will give
the gloom of gloom, and the sunshine of sunshine.  In a portrait, he
must inscribe the character, and not the features, and must esteem
the man who sits to him as himself only an imperfect picture or
likeness of the aspiring original within.

        What is that abridgment and selection we observe in all
spiritual activity, but itself the creative impulse? for it is the
inlet of that higher illumination which teaches to convey a larger
sense by simpler symbols.  What is a man but nature's finer success
in self-explication?  What is a man but a finer and compacter
landscape than the horizon figures, -- nature's eclecticism? and what
is his speech, his love of painting, love of nature, but a still
finer success? all the weary miles and tons of space and bulk left
out, and the spirit or moral of it contracted into a musical word, or
the most cunning stroke of the pencil?

        But the artist must employ the symbols in use in his day and
nation, to convey his enlarged sense to his fellow-men.  Thus the new
in art is always formed out of the old.  The Genius of the Hour sets
his ineffaceable seal on the work, and gives it an inexpressible
charm for the imagination.  As far as the spiritual character of the
period overpowers the artist, and finds expression in his work, so
far it will retain a certain grandeur, and will represent to future
beholders the Unknown, the Inevitable, the Divine.  No man can quite
exclude this element of Necessity from his labor.  No man can quite
emancipate himself from his age and country, or produce a model in
which the education, the religion, the politics, usages, and arts, of
his times shall have no share.  Though he were never so original,
never so wilful and fantastic, he cannot wipe out of his work every
trace of the thoughts amidst which it grew.  The very avoidance
betrays the usage he avoids.  Above his will, and out of his sight,
he is necessitated, by the air he breathes, and the idea on which he
and his contemporaries live and toil, to share the manner of his
times, without knowing what that manner is.  Now that which is
inevitable in the work has a higher charm than individual talent can
ever give, inasmuch as the artist's pen or chisel seems to have been
held and guided by a gigantic hand to inscribe a line in the history
of the human race.  This circumstance gives a value to the Egyptian
hieroglyphics, to the Indian, Chinese, and Mexican idols, however
gross and shapeless.  They denote the height of the human soul in
that hour, and were not fantastic, but sprung from a necessity as
deep as the world.  Shall I now add, that the whole extant product of
the plastic arts has herein its highest value, _as history_; as a
stroke drawn in the portrait of that fate, perfect and beautiful,
according to whose ordinations all beings advance to their beatitude?

        Thus, historically viewed, it has been the office of art to
educate the perception of beauty.  We are immersed in beauty, but our
eyes have no clear vision.  It needs, by the exhibition of single
traits, to assist and lead the dormant taste.  We carve and paint, or
we behold what is carved and painted, as students of the mystery of
Form.  The virtue of art lies in detachment, in sequestering one
object from the embarrassing variety.  Until one thing comes out from
the connection of things, there can be enjoyment, contemplation, but
no thought.  Our happiness and unhappiness are unproductive.  The
infant lies in a pleasing trance, but his individual character and
his practical power depend on his daily progress in the separation of
things, and dealing with one at a time.  Love and all the passions
concentrate all existence around a single form.  It is the habit of
certain minds to give an all-excluding fulness to the object, the
thought, the word, they alight upon, and to make that for the time
the deputy of the world.  These are the artists, the orators, the
leaders of society.  The power to detach, and to magnify by
detaching, is the essence of rhetoric in the hands of the orator and
the poet.  This rhetoric, or power to fix the momentary eminency of
an object, -- so remarkable in Burke, in Byron, in Carlyle, -- the
painter and sculptor exhibit in color and in stone.  The power
depends on the depth of the artist's insight of that object he
contemplates.  For every object has its roots in central nature, and
may of course be so exhibited to us as to represent the world.
Therefore, each work of genius is the tyrant of the hour, and
concentrates attention on itself.  For the time, it is the only thing
worth naming to do that, -- be it a sonnet, an opera, a landscape, a
statue, an oration, the plan of a temple, of a campaign, or of a
voyage of discovery.  Presently we pass to some other object, which
rounds itself into a whole, as did the first; for example, a
well-laid garden: and nothing seems worth doing but the laying out of
gardens.  I should think fire the best thing in the world, if I were
not acquainted with air, and water, and earth.  For it is the right
and property of all natural objects, of all genuine talents, of all
native properties whatsoever, to be for their moment the top of the
world.  A squirrel leaping from bough to bough, and making the wood
but one wide tree for his pleasure, fills the eye not less than a
lion, -- is beautiful, self-sufficing, and stands then and there for
nature.  A good ballad draws my ear and heart whilst I listen, as
much as an epic has done before.  A dog, drawn by a master, or a
litter of pigs, satisfies, and is a reality not less than the
frescoes of Angelo.  From this succession of excellent objects, we
learn at last the immensity of the world, the opulence of human
nature, which can run out to infinitude in any direction.  But I also
learn that what astonished and fascinated me in the first work
astonished me in the second work also; that excellence of all things
is one.

        The office of painting and sculpture seems to be merely
initial.  The best pictures can easily tell us their last secret.
The best pictures are rude draughts of a few of the miraculous dots
and lines and dyes which make up the ever-changing "landscape with
figures" amidst which we dwell.  Painting seems to be to the eye what
dancing is to the limbs.  When that has educated the frame to
self-possession, to nimbleness, to grace, the steps of the
dancing-master are better forgotten; so painting teaches me the
splendor of color and the expression of form, and, as I see many
pictures and higher genius in the art, I see the boundless opulence
of the pencil, the indifferency in which the artist stands free to
choose out of the possible forms.  If he can draw every thing, why
draw any thing? and then is my eye opened to the eternal picture
which nature paints in the street with moving men and children,
beggars, and fine ladies, draped in red, and green, and blue, and
gray; long-haired, grizzled, white-faced, black-faced, wrinkled,
giant, dwarf, expanded, elfish, -- capped and based by heaven, earth,
and sea.

        A gallery of sculpture teaches more austerely the same lesson.
As picture teaches the coloring, so sculpture the anatomy of form.
When I have seen fine statues, and afterwards enter a public
assembly, I understand well what he meant who said, "When I have been
reading Homer, all men look like giants." I too see that painting and
sculpture are gymnastics of the eye, its training to the niceties and
curiosities of its function.  There is no statue like this living
man, with his infinite advantage over all ideal sculpture, of
perpetual variety.  What a gallery of art have I here!  No mannerist
made these varied groups and diverse original single figures.  Here
is the artist himself improvising, grim and glad, at his block.  Now
one thought strikes him, now another, and with each moment he alters
the whole air, attitude, and expression of his clay.  Away with your
nonsense of oil and easels, of marble and chisels: except to open
your eyes to the masteries of eternal art, they are hypocritical
rubbish.

        The reference of all production at last to an aboriginal Power
explains the traits common to all works of the highest art, -- that
they are universally intelligible; that they restore to us the
simplest states of mind; and are religious.  Since what skill is
therein shown is the reappearance of the original soul, a jet of pure
light, it should produce a similar impression to that made by natural
objects.  In happy hours, nature appears to us one with art; art
perfected, -- the work of genius.  And the individual, in whom simple
tastes and susceptibility to all the great human influences overpower
the accidents of a local and special culture, is the best critic of
art.  Though we travel the world over to find the beautiful, we must
carry it with us, or we find it not.  The best of beauty is a finer
charm than skill in surfaces, in outlines, or rules of art can ever
teach, namely, a radiation from the work of art of human character,
-- a wonderful expression through stone, or canvas, or musical sound,
of the deepest and simplest attributes of our nature, and therefore
most intelligible at last to those souls which have these attributes.
In the sculptures of the Greeks, in the masonry of the Romans, and in
the pictures of the Tuscan and Venetian masters, the highest charm is
the universal language they speak.  A confession of moral nature, of
purity, love, and hope, breathes from them all.  That which we carry
to them, the same we bring back more fairly illustrated in the
memory.  The traveller who visits the Vatican, and passes from
chamber to chamber through galleries of statues, vases, sarcophagi,
and candelabra, through all forms of beauty, cut in the richest
materials, is in danger of forgetting the simplicity of the
principles out of which they all sprung, and that they had their
origin from thoughts and laws in his own breast.  He studies the
technical rules on these wonderful remains, but forgets that these
works were not always thus constellated; that they are the
contributions of many ages and many countries; that each came out of
the solitary workshop of one artist, who toiled perhaps in ignorance
of the existence of other sculpture, created his work without other
model, save life, household life, and the sweet and smart of personal
relations, of beating hearts, and meeting eyes, of poverty, and
necessity, and hope, and fear.  These were his inspirations, and
these are the effects he carries home to your heart and mind.  In
proportion to his force, the artist will find in his work an outlet
for his proper character.  He must not be in any manner pinched or
hindered by his material, but through his necessity of imparting
himself the adamant will be wax in his hands, and will allow an
adequate communication of himself, in his full stature and
proportion.  He need not cumber himself with a conventional nature
and culture, nor ask what is the mode in Rome or in Paris, but that
house, and weather, and manner of living which poverty and the fate
of birth have made at once so odious and so dear, in the gray,
unpainted wood cabin, on the corner of a New Hampshire farm, or in
the log-hut of the backwoods, or in the narrow lodging where he has
endured the constraints and seeming of a city poverty, will serve as
well as any other condition as the symbol of a thought which pours
itself indifferently through all.

        I remember, when in my younger days I had heard of the wonders
of Italian painting, I fancied the great pictures would be great
strangers; some surprising combination of color and form; a foreign
wonder, barbaric pearl and gold, like the spontoons and standards of
the militia, which play such pranks in the eyes and imaginations of
school-boys.  I was to see and acquire I knew not what.  When I came
at last to Rome, and saw with eyes the pictures, I found that genius
left to novices the gay and fantastic and ostentatious, and itself
pierced directly to the simple and true; that it was familiar and
sincere; that it was the old, eternal fact I had met already in so
many forms, -- unto which I lived; that it was the plain _you and me_
I knew so well, -- had left at home in so many conversations.  I had
the same experience already in a church at Naples.  There I saw that
nothing was changed with me but the place, and said to myself, --
`Thou foolish child, hast thou come out hither, over four thousand
miles of salt water, to find that which was perfect to thee there at
home?' -- that fact I saw again in the Academmia at Naples, in the
chambers of sculpture, and yet again when I came to Rome, and to the
paintings of Raphael, Angelo, Sacchi, Titian, and Leonardo da Vinci.
"What, old mole! workest thou in the earth so fast?" It had travelled
by my side: that which I fancied I had left in Boston was here in the
Vatican, and again at Milan, and at Paris, and made all travelling
ridiculous as a treadmill.  I now require this of all pictures, that
they domesticate me, not that they dazzle me.  Pictures must not be
too picturesque.  Nothing astonishes men so much as common-sense and
plain dealing.  All great actions have been simple, and all great
pictures are.

        The Transfiguration, by Raphael, is an eminent example of this
peculiar merit.  A calm, benignant beauty shines over all this
picture, and goes directly to the heart.  It seems almost to call you
by name.  The sweet and sublime face of Jesus is beyond praise, yet
how it disappoints all florid expectations!  This familiar, simple,
home-speaking countenance is as if one should meet a friend.  The
knowledge of picture-dealers has its value, but listen not to their
criticism when your heart is touched by genius.  It was not painted
for them, it was painted for you; for such as had eyes capable of
being touched by simplicity and lofty emotions.

        Yet when we have said all our fine things about the arts, we
must end with a frank confession, that the arts, as we know them, are
but initial.  Our best praise is given to what they aimed and
promised, not to the actual result.  He has conceived meanly of the
resources of man, who believes that the best age of production is
past.  The real value of the Iliad, or the Transfiguration, is as
signs of power; billows or ripples they are of the stream of
tendency; tokens of the everlasting effort to produce, which even in
its worst estate the soul betrays.  Art has not yet come to its
maturity, if it do not put itself abreast with the most potent
influences of the world, if it is not practical and moral, if it do
not stand in connection with the conscience, if it do not make the
poor and uncultivated feel that it addresses them with a voice of
lofty cheer.  There is higher work for Art than the arts.  They are
abortive births of an imperfect or vitiated instinct.  Art is the
need to create; but in its essence, immense and universal, it is
impatient of working with lame or tied hands, and of making cripples
and monsters, such as all pictures and statues are.  Nothing less
than the creation of man and nature is its end.  A man should find in
it an outlet for his whole energy.  He may paint and carve only as
long as he can do that.  Art should exhilarate, and throw down the
walls of circumstance on every side, awakening in the beholder the
same sense of universal relation and power which the work evinced in
the artist, and its highest effect is to make new artists.

        Already History is old enough to witness the old age and
disappearance of particular arts.  The art of sculpture is long ago
perished to any real effect.  It was originally a useful art, a mode
of writing, a savage's record of gratitude or devotion, and among a
people possessed of a wonderful perception of form this childish
carving was refined to the utmost splendor of effect.  But it is the
game of a rude and youthful people, and not the manly labor of a wise
and spiritual nation.  Under an oak-tree loaded with leaves and nuts,
under a sky full of eternal eyes, I stand in a thoroughfare; but in
the works of our plastic arts, and especially of sculpture, creation
is driven into a corner.  I cannot hide from myself that there is a
certain appearance of paltriness, as of toys, and the trumpery of a
theatre, in sculpture.  Nature transcends all our moods of thought,
and its secret we do not yet find.  But the gallery stands at the
mercy of our moods, and there is a moment when it becomes frivolous.
I do not wonder that Newton, with an attention habitually engaged on
the paths of planets and suns, should have wondered what the Earl of
Pembroke found to admire in "stone dolls."  Sculpture may serve to
teach the pupil how deep is the secret of form, how purely the spirit
can translate its meanings into that eloquent dialect.  But the
statue will look cold and false before that new activity which needs
to roll through all things, and is impatient of counterfeits, and
things not alive.  Picture and sculpture are the celebrations and
festivities of form.  But true art is never fixed, but always
flowing.  The sweetest music is not in the oratorio, but in the human
voice when it speaks from its instant life tones of tenderness,
truth, or courage.  The oratorio has already lost its relation to the
morning, to the sun, and the earth, but that persuading voice is in
tune with these.  All works of art should not be detached, but
extempore performances.  A great man is a new statue in every
attitude and action.  A beautiful woman is a picture which drives all
beholders nobly mad.  Life may be lyric or epic, as well as a poem or
a romance.

        A true announcement of the law of creation, if a man were found
worthy to declare it, would carry art up into the kingdom of nature,
and destroy its separate and contrasted existence.  The fountains of
invention and beauty in modern society are all but dried up.  A
popular novel, a theatre, or a ball-room makes us feel that we are
all paupers in the alms-house of this world, without dignity, without
skill, or industry.  Art is as poor and low.  The old tragic
Necessity, which lowers on the brows even of the Venuses and the
Cupids of the antique, and furnishes the sole apology for the
intrusion of such anomalous figures into nature, -- namely, that they
were inevitable; that the artist was drunk with a passion for form
which he could not resist, and which vented itself in these fine
extravagances, -- no longer dignifies the chisel or the pencil.  But
the artist and the connoisseur now seek in art the exhibition of
their talent, or an asylum from the evils of life.  Men are not well
pleased with the figure they make in their own imaginations, and they
flee to art, and convey their better sense in an oratorio, a statue,
or a picture.  Art makes the same effort which a sensual prosperity
makes; namely, to detach the beautiful from the useful, to do up the
work as unavoidable, and, hating it, pass on to enjoyment.  These
solaces and compensations, this division of beauty from use, the laws
of nature do not permit.  As soon as beauty is sought, not from
religion and love, but for pleasure, it degrades the seeker.  High
beauty is no longer attainable by him in canvas or in stone, in
sound, or in lyrical construction; an effeminate, prudent, sickly
beauty, which is not beauty, is all that can be formed; for the hand
can never execute any thing higher than the character can inspire.

        The art that thus separates is itself first separated.  Art
must not be a superficial talent, but must begin farther back in man.
Now men do not see nature to be beautiful, and they go to make a
statue which shall be.  They abhor men as tasteless, dull, and
inconvertible, and console themselves with color-bags, and blocks of
marble.  They reject life as prosaic, and create a death which they
call poetic.  They despatch the day's weary chores, and fly to
voluptuous reveries.  They eat and drink, that they may afterwards
execute the ideal.  Thus is art vilified; the name conveys to the
mind its secondary and bad senses; it stands in the imagination as
somewhat contrary to nature, and struck with death from the first.
Would it not be better to begin higher up, -- to serve the ideal
before they eat and drink; to serve the ideal in eating and drinking,
in drawing the breath, and in the functions of life?  Beauty must
come back to the useful arts, and the distinction between the fine
and the useful arts be forgotten.  If history were truly told, if
life were nobly spent, it would be no longer easy or possible to
distinguish the one from the other.  In nature, all is useful, all is
beautiful.  It is therefore beautiful, because it is alive, moving,
reproductive; it is therefore useful, because it is symmetrical and
fair.  Beauty will not come at the call of a legislature, nor will it
repeat in England or America its history in Greece.  It will come, as
always, unannounced, and spring up between the feet of brave and
earnest men.  It is in vain that we look for genius to reiterate its
miracles in the old arts; it is its instinct to find beauty and
holiness in new and necessary facts, in the field and road-side, in
the shop and mill.  Proceeding from a religious heart it will raise
to a divine use the railroad, the insurance office, the joint-stock
company, our law, our primary assemblies, our commerce, the galvanic
battery, the electric jar, the prism, and the chemist's retort, in
which we seek now only an economical use.  Is not the selfish and
even cruel aspect which belongs to our great mechanical works, -- to
mills, railways, and machinery, -- the effect of the mercenary
impulses which these works obey?  When its errands are noble and
adequate, a steamboat bridging the Atlantic between Old and New
England, and arriving at its ports with the punctuality of a planet,
is a step of man into harmony with nature.  The boat at St.
Petersburgh, which plies along the Lena by magnetism, needs little to
make it sublime.  When science is learned in love, and its powers are
wielded by love, they will appear the supplements and continuations
of the material creation.
.
        AN ADDRESS
 
        _Delivered before the Senior Class in Divinity College,
Cambridge, Sunday Evening, July 15, 1838_

 

        In this refulgent summer, it has been a luxury to draw the
breath of life.  The grassurst, the meadow is spotted with fire and
gold in the tint of flowers.  The air is full of birds, and sweet
with the breath of the pine, the balm-of-Gilead, and the new hay.
Night brings no gloom to the heart with its welcome shade.  Through
the transparent darkness the stars pour their almost spiritual rays.
Man under them seems a young child, and his huge globe a toy.  The
cool night bathes the world as with a river, and prepares his eyes
again for the crimson dawn.  The mystery of nature was never
displayed more happily.  The corn and the wine have been freely dealt
to all creatures, and the never-broken silence with which the old
bounty goes forward, has not yielded yet one word of explanation.
One is constrained to respect the perfection of this world, in which
our senses converse.  How wide; how rich; what invitation from every
property it gives to every faculty of man!  In its fruitful soils; in
its navigable sea; in its mountains of metal and stone; in its
forests of all woods; in its animals; in its chemical ingredients; in
the powers and path of light, heat, attraction, and life, it is well
worth the pith and heart of great men to subdue and enjoy it.  The
planters, the mechanics, the inventors, the astronomers, the builders
of cities, and the captains, history delights to honor.

        But when the mind opens, and reveals the laws which traverse
the universe, and make things what they are, then shrinks the great
world at once into a mere illustration and fable of this mind.  What
am I? and What is? asks the human spirit with a curiosity
new-kindled, but never to be quenched.  Behold these outrunning laws,
which our imperfect apprehension can see tend this way and that, but
not come full circle.  Behold these infinite relations, so like, so
unlike; many, yet one.  I would study, I would know, I would admire
forever.  These works of thought have been the entertainments of the
human spirit in all ages.

        A more secret, sweet, and overpowering beauty appears to man
when his heart and mind open to the sentiment of virtue.  Then he is
instructed in what is above him.  He learns that his being is without
bound; that, to the good, to the perfect, he is born, low as he now
lies in evil and weakness.  That which he venerates is still his own,
though he has not realized it yet.  _He ought_.  He knows the sense
of that grand word, though his analysis fails entirely to render
account of it.  When in innocency, or when by intellectual
perception, he attains to say, -- `I love the Right; Truth is
beautiful within and without, forevermore.  Virtue, I am thine: save
me: use me: thee will I serve, day and night, in great, in small,
that I may be not virtuous, but virtue;' -- then is the end of the
creation answered, and God is well pleased.

        The sentiment of virtue is a reverence and delight in the
presence of certain divine laws.  It perceives that this homely game
of life we play, covers, under what seem foolish details, principles
that astonish.  The child amidst his baubles, is learning the action
of light, motion, gravity, muscular force; and in the game of human
life, love, fear, justice, appetite, man, and God, interact.  These
laws refuse to be adequately stated.  They will not be written out on
paper, or spoken by the tongue.  They elude our persevering thought;
yet we read them hourly in each other's faces, in each other's
actions, in our own remorse.  The moral traits which are all globed
into every virtuous act and thought, -- in speech, we must sever, and
describe or suggest by painful enumeration of many particulars.  Yet,
as this sentiment is the essence of all religion, let me guide your
eye to the precise objects of the sentiment, by an enumeration of
some of those classes of facts in which this element is conspicuous.

        The intuition of the moral sentiment is an insight of the
perfection of the laws of the soul.  These laws execute themselves.
They are out of time, out of space, and not subject to circumstance.
Thus; in the soul of man there is a justice whose retributions are
instant and entire.  He who does a good deed, is instantly ennobled.
He who does a mean deed, is by the action itself contracted.  He who
puts off impurity, thereby puts on purity.  If a man is at heart
just, then in so far is he God; the safety of God, the immortality of
God, the majesty of God do enter into that man with justice.  If a
man dissemble, deceive, he deceives himself, and goes out of
acquaintance with his own being.  A man in the view of absolute
goodness, adores, with total humility.  Every step so downward, is a
step upward.  The man who renounces himself, comes to himself.

        See how this rapid intrinsic energy worketh everywhere,
righting wrongs, correcting appearances, and bringing up facts to a
harmony with thoughts.  Its operation in life, though slow to the
senses, is, at last, as sure as in the soul.  By it, a man is made
the Providence to himself, dispensing good to his goodness, and evil
to his sin.  Character is always known.  Thefts never enrich; alms
never impoverish; murder will speak out of stone walls.  The least
admixture of a lie, -- for example, the taint of vanity, the least
attempt to make a good impression, a favorable appearance, -- will
instantly vitiate the effect.  But speak the truth, and all nature
and all spirits help you with unexpected furtherance.  Speak the
truth, and all things alive or brute are vouchers, and the very roots
of the grass underground there, do seem to stir and move to bear you
witness.  See again the perfection of the Law as it applies itself to
the affections, and becomes the law of society.  As we are, so we
associate.  The good, by affinity, seek the good; the vile, by
affinity, the vile.  Thus of their own volition, souls proceed into
heaven, into hell.

        These facts have always suggested to man the sublime creed,
that the world is not the product of manifold power, but of one will,
of one mind; and that one mind is everywhere active, in each ray of
the star, in each wavelet of the pool; and whatever opposes that
will, is everywhere balked and baffled, because things are made so,
and not otherwise.  Good is positive.  Evil is merely privative, not
absolute: it is like cold, which is the privation of heat.  All evil
is so much death or nonentity.  Benevolence is absolute and real.  So
much benevolence as a man hath, so much life hath he.  For all things
proceed out of this same spirit, which is differently named love,
justice, temperance, in its different applications, just as the ocean
receives different names on the several shores which it washes.  All
things proceed out of the same spirit, and all things conspire with
it.  Whilst a man seeks good ends, he is strong by the whole strength
of nature.  In so far as he roves from these ends, he bereaves
himself of power, of auxiliaries; his being shrinks out of all remote
channels, he becomes less and less, a mote, a point, until absolute
badness is absolute death.

        The perception of this law of laws awakens in the mind a
sentiment which we call the religious sentiment, and which makes our
highest happiness.  Wonderful is its power to charm and to command.
It is a mountain air.  It is the embalmer of the world.  It is myrrh
and storax, and chlorine and rosemary.  It makes the sky and the
hills sublime, and the silent song of the stars is it.  By it, is the
universe made safe and habitable, not by science or power.  Thought
may work cold and intransitive in things, and find no end or unity;
but the dawn of the sentiment of virtue on the heart, gives and is
the assurance that Law is sovereign over all natures; and the worlds,
time, space, eternity, do seem to break out into joy.

        This sentiment is divine and deifying.  It is the beatitude of
man.  It makes him illimitable.  Through it, the soul first knows
itself.  It corrects the capital mistake of the infant man, who seeks
to be great by following the great, and hopes to derive advantages
_from another_, -- by showing the fountain of all good to be in
himself, and that he, equally with every man, is an inlet into the
deeps of Reason.  When he says, "I ought;" when love warms him; when
he chooses, warned from on high, the good and great deed; then, deep
melodies wander through his soul from Supreme Wisdom.  Then he can
worship, and be enlarged by his worship; for he can never go behind
this sentiment.  In the sublimest flights of the soul, rectitude is
never surmounted, love is never outgrown.

        This sentiment lies at the foundation of society, and
successively creates all forms of worship.  The principle of
veneration never dies out.  Man fallen into superstition, into
sensuality, is never quite without the visions of the moral
sentiment.  In like manner, all the expressions of this sentiment are
sacred and permanent in proportion to their purity.  The expressions
of this sentiment affect us more than all other compositions.  The
sentences of the oldest time, which ejaculate this piety, are still
fresh and fragrant.  This thought dwelled always deepest in the minds
of men in the devout and contemplative East; not alone in Palestine,
where it reached its purest expression, but in Egypt, in Persia, in
India, in China.  Europe has always owed to oriental genius, its
divine impulses.  What these holy bards said, all sane men found
agreeable and true.  And the unique impression of Jesus upon mankind,
whose name is not so much written as ploughed into the history of
this world, is proof of the subtle virtue of this infusion.

        Meantime, whilst the doors of the temple stand open, night and
day, before every man, and the oracles of this truth cease never, it
is guarded by one stern condition; this, namely; it is an intuition.
It cannot be received at second hand.  Truly speaking, it is not
instruction, but provocation, that I can receive from another soul.
What he announces, I must find true in me, or wholly reject; and on
his word, or as his second, be he who he may, I can accept nothing.
On the contrary, the absence of this primary faith is the presence of
degradation.  As is the flood so is the ebb.  Let this faith depart,
and the very words it spake, and the things it made, become false and
hurtful.  Then falls the church, the state, art, letters, life.  The
doctrine of the divine nature being forgotten, a sickness infects and
dwarfs the constitution.  Once man was all; now he is an appendage, a
nuisance.  And because the indwelling Supreme Spirit cannot wholly be
got rid of, the doctrine of it suffers this perversion, that the
divine nature is attributed to one or two persons, and denied to all
the rest, and denied with fury.  The doctrine of inspiration is lost;
the base doctrine of the majority of voices, usurps the place of the
doctrine of the soul.  Miracles, prophecy, poetry; the ideal life,
the holy life, exist as ancient history merely; they are not in the
belief, nor in the aspiration of society; but, when suggested, seem
ridiculous.  Life is comic or pitiful, as soon as the high ends of
being fade out of sight, and man becomes near-sighted, and can only
attend to what addresses the senses.

        These general views, which, whilst they are general, none will
contest, find abundant illustration in the history of religion, and
especially in the history of the Christian church.  In that, all of
us have had our birth and nurture.  The truth contained in that, you,
my young friends, are now setting forth to teach.  As the Cultus, or
established worship of the civilized world, it has great historical
interest for us.  Of its blessed words, which have been the
consolation of humanity, you need not that I should speak.  I shall
endeavor to discharge my duty to you, on this occasion, by pointing
out two errors in its administration, which daily appear more gross
from the point of view we have just now taken.

        Jesus Christ belonged to the true race of prophets.  He saw
with open eye the mystery of the soul.  Drawn by its severe harmony,
ravished with its beauty, he lived in it, and had his being there.
Alone in all history, he estimated the greatness of man.  One man was
true to what is in you and me.  He saw that God incarnates himself in
man, and evermore goes forth anew to take possession of his world.
He said, in this jubilee of sublime emotion, `I am divine.  Through
me, God acts; through me, speaks.  Would you see God, see me; or, see
thee, when thou also thinkest as I now think.' But what a distortion
did his doctrine and memory suffer in the same, in the next, and the
following ages!  There is no doctrine of the Reason which will bear
to be taught by the Understanding.  The understanding caught this
high chant from the poet's lips, and said, in the next age, `This was
Jehovah come down out of heaven.  I will kill you, if you say he was
a man.' The idioms of his language, and the figures of his rhetoric,
have usurped the place of his truth; and churches are not built on
his principles, but on his tropes.  Christianity became a Mythus, as
the poetic teaching of Greece and of Egypt, before.  He spoke of
miracles; for he felt that man's life was a miracle, and all that man
doth, and he knew that this daily miracle shines, as the character
ascends.  But the word Miracle, as pronounced by Christian churches,
gives a false impression; it is Monster.  It is not one with the
blowing clover and the falling rain.

        He felt respect for Moses and the prophets; but no unfit
tenderness at postponing their initial revelations, to the hour and
the man that now is; to the eternal revelation in the heart.  Thus
was he a true man.  Having seen that the law in us is commanding, he
would not suffer it to be commanded.  Boldly, with hand, and heart,
and life, he declared it was God.  Thus is he, as I think, the only
soul in history who has appreciated the worth of a man.

        1.  In this point of view we become very sensible of the first
defect of historical Christianity.  Historical Christianity has
fallen into the error that corrupts all attempts to communicate
religion.  As it appears to us, and as it has appeared for ages, it
is not the doctrine of the soul, but an exaggeration of the personal,
the positive, the ritual.  It has dwelt, it dwells, with noxious
exaggeration about the _person_ of Jesus.  The soul knows no persons.
It invites every man to expand to the full circle of the universe,
and will have no preferences but those of spontaneous love.  But by
this eastern monarchy of a Christianity, which indolence and fear
have built, the friend of man is made the injurer of man.  The manner
in which his name is surrounded with expressions, which were once
sallies of admiration and love, but are now petrified into official
titles, kills all generous sympathy and liking.  All who hear me,
feel, that the language that describes Christ to Europe and America,
is not the style of friendship and enthusiasm to a good and noble
heart, but is appropriated and formal, -- paints a demigod, as the
Orientals or the Greeks would describe Osiris or Apollo.  Accept the
injurious impositions of our early catachetical instruction, and even
honesty and self-denial were but splendid sins, if they did not wear
the Christian name.  One would rather be

        `A pagan, suckled in a creed outworn,'
 
        than to be defrauded of his manly right in coming into nature,
and finding not names and places, not land and professions, but even
virtue and truth foreclosed and monopolized.  You shall not be a man
even.  You shall not own the world; you shall not dare, and live
after the infinite Law that is in you, and in company with the
infinite Beauty which heaven and earth reflect to you in all lovely
forms; but you must subordinate your nature to Christ's nature; you
must accept our interpretations; and take his portrait as the vulgar
draw it.

        That is always best which gives me to myself.  The sublime is
excited in me by the great stoical doctrine, Obey thyself.  That
which shows God in me, fortifies me.  That which shows God out of me,
makes me a wart and a wen.  There is no longer a necessary reason for
my being.  Already the long shadows of untimely oblivion creep over
me, and I shall decease forever.

        The divine bards are the friends of my virtue, of my intellect
of my strength.  They admonish me, that the gleams which flash across
my mind, are not mine, but God's; that they had the like, and were
not disobedient to the heavenly vision.  So I love them.  Noble
provocations go out from them, inviting me to resist evil; to subdue
the world; and to Be.  And thus by his holy thoughts, Jesus serves
us, and thus only.  To aim to convert a man by miracles, is a
profanation of the soul.  A true conversion, a true Christ, is now,
as always, to be made, by the reception of beautiful sentiments.  It
is true that a great and rich soul, like his, falling among the
simple, does so preponderate, that, as his did, it names the world.
The world seems to them to exist for him, and they have not yet drunk
so deeply of his sense, as to see that only by coming again to
themselves, or to God in themselves, can they grow forevermore.  It
is a low benefit to give me something; it is a high benefit to enable
me to do somewhat of myself.  The time is coming when all men will
see, that the gift of God to the soul is not a vaunting,
overpowering, excluding sanctity, but a sweet, natural goodness, a
goodness like thine and mine, and that so invites thine and mine to
be and to grow.

        The injustice of the vulgar tone of preaching is not less
flagrant to Jesus, than to the souls which it profanes.  The
preachers do not see that they make his gospel not glad, and shear
him of the locks of beauty and the attributes of heaven.  When I see
a majestic Epaminondas, or Washington; when I see among my
contemporaries, a true orator, an upright judge, a dear friend; when
I vibrate to the melody and fancy of a poem; I see beauty that is to
be desired.  And so lovely, and with yet more entire consent of my
human being, sounds in my ear the severe music of the bards that have
sung of the true God in all ages.  Now do not degrade the life and
dialogues of Christ out of the circle of this charm, by insulation
and peculiarity.  Let them lie as they befel, alive and warm, part of
human life, and of the landscape, and of the cheerful day.

        2.  The second defect of the traditionary and limited way of
using the mind of Christ is a consequence of the first; this, namely;
that the Moral Nature, that Law of laws, whose revelations introduce
greatness, -- yea, God himself, into the open soul, is not explored
as the fountain of the established teaching in society.  Men have
come to speak of the revelation as somewhat long ago given and done,
as if God were dead.  The injury to faith throttles the preacher; and
the goodliest of institutions becomes an uncertain and inarticulate
voice.

        It is very certain that it is the effect of conversation with
the beauty of the soul, to beget a desire and need to impart to
others the same knowledge and love.  If utterance is denied, the
thought lies like a burden on the man.  Always the seer is a sayer.
Somehow his dream is told: somehow he publishes it with solemn joy:
sometimes with pencil on canvas; sometimes with chisel on stone;
sometimes in towers and aisles of granite, his soul's worship is
builded; sometimes in anthems of indefinite music; but clearest and
most permanent, in words.

        The man enamored of this excellency, becomes its priest or
poet.  The office is coeval with the world.  But observe the
condition, the spiritual limitation of the office.  The spirit only
can teach.  Not any profane man, not any sensual, not any liar, not
any slave can teach, but only he can give, who has; he only can
create, who is.  The man on whom the soul descends, through whom the
soul speaks, alone can teach.  Courage, piety, love, wisdom, can
teach; and every man can open his door to these angels, and they
shall bring him the gift of tongues.  But the man who aims to speak
as books enable, as synods use, as the fashion guides, and as
interest commands, babbles.  Let him hush.

        To this holy office, you propose to devote yourselves.  I wish
you may feel your call in throbs of desire and hope.  The office is
the first in the world.  It is of that reality, that it cannot suffer
the deduction of any falsehood.  And it is my duty to say to you,
that the need was never greater of new revelation than now.  From the
views I have already expressed, you will infer the sad conviction,
which I share, I believe, with numbers, of the universal decay and
now almost death of faith in society.  The soul is not preached.  The
Church seems to totter to its fall, almost all life extinct.  On this
occasion, any complaisance would be criminal, which told you, whose
hope and commission it is to preach the faith of Christ, that the
faith of Christ is preached.

        It is time that this ill-suppressed murmur of all thoughtful
men against the famine of our churches; this moaning of the heart
because it is bereaved of the consolation, the hope, the grandeur,
that come alone out of the culture of the moral nature; should be
heard through the sleep of indolence, and over the din of routine.
This great and perpetual office of the preacher is not discharged.
Preaching is the expression of the moral sentiment in application to
the duties of life.  In how many churches, by how many prophets, tell
me, is man made sensible that he is an infinite Soul; that the earth
and heavens are passing into his mind; that he is drinking forever
the soul of God?  Where now sounds the persuasion, that by its very
melody imparadises my heart, and so affirms its own origin in heaven?
Where shall I hear words such as in elder ages drew men to leave all
and follow, -- father and mother, house and land, wife and child?
Where shall I hear these august laws of moral being so pronounced, as
to fill my ear, and I feel ennobled by the offer of my uttermost
action and passion?  The test of the true faith, certainly, should be
its power to charm and command the soul, as the laws of nature
control the activity of the hands, -- so commanding that we find
pleasure and honor in obeying.  The faith should blend with the light
of rising and of setting suns, with the flying cloud, the singing
bird, and the breath of flowers.  But now the priest's Sabbath has
lost the splendor of nature; it is unlovely; we are glad when it is
done; we can make, we do make, even sitting in our pews, a far
better, holier, sweeter, for ourselves.

        Whenever the pulpit is usurped by a formalist, then is the
worshipper defrauded and disconsolate.  We shrink as soon as the
prayers begin, which do not uplift, but smite and offend us.  We are
fain to wrap our cloaks about us, and secure, as best we can, a
solitude that hears not.  I once heard a preacher who sorely tempted
me to say, I would go to church no more.  Men go, thought I, where
they are wont to go, else had no soul entered the temple in the
afternoon.  A snow storm was falling around us.  The snow storm was
real; the preacher merely spectral; and the eye felt the sad contrast
in looking at him, and then out of the window behind him, into the
beautiful meteor of the snow.  He had lived in vain.  He had no one
word intimating that he had laughed or wept, was married or in love,
had been commended, or cheated, or chagrined.  If he had ever lived
and acted, we were none the wiser for it.  The capital secret of his
profession, namely, to convert life into truth, he had not learned.
Not one fact in all his experience, had he yet imported into his
doctrine.  This man had ploughed, and planted, and talked, and
bought, and sold; he had read books; he had eaten and drunken; his
head aches; his heart throbs; he smiles and suffers; yet was there
not a surmise, a hint, in all the discourse, that he had ever lived
at all.  Not a line did he draw out of real history.  The true
preacher can be known by this, that he deals out to the people his
life, -- life passed through the fire of thought.  But of the bad
preacher, it could not be told from his sermon, what age of the world
he fell in; whether he had a father or a child; whether he was a
freeholder or a pauper; whether he was a citizen or a countryman; or
any other fact of his biography.  It seemed strange that the people
should come to church.  It seemed as if their houses were very
unentertaining, that they should prefer this thoughtless clamor.  It
shows that there is a commanding attraction in the moral sentiment,
that can lend a faint tint of light to dulness and ignorance, coming
in its name and place.  The good hearer is sure he has been touched
sometimes; is sure there is somewhat to be reached, and some word
that can reach it.  When he listens to these vain words, he comforts
himself by their relation to his remembrance of better hours, and so
they clatter and echo unchallenged.

        I am not ignorant that when we preach unworthily, it is not
always quite in vain.  There is a good ear, in some men, that draws
supplies to virtue out of very indifferent nutriment.  There is
poetic truth concealed in all the common-places of prayer and of
sermons, and though foolishly spoken, they may be wisely heard; for,
each is some select expression that broke out in a moment of piety
from some stricken or jubilant soul, and its excellency made it
remembered.  The prayers and even the dogmas of our church, are like
the zodiac of Denderah, and the astronomical monuments of the
Hindoos, wholly insulated from anything now extant in the life and
business of the people.  They mark the height to which the waters
once rose.  But this docility is a check upon the mischief from the
good and devout.  In a large portion of the community, the religious
service gives rise to quite other thoughts and emotions.  We need not
chide the negligent servant.  We are struck with pity, rather, at the
swift retribution of his sloth.  Alas for the unhappy man that is
called to stand in the pulpit, and _not_ give bread of life.
Everything that befalls, accuses him.  Would he ask contributions for
the missions, foreign or domestic?  Instantly his face is suffused
with shame, to propose to his parish, that they should send money a
hundred or a thousand miles, to furnish such poor fare as they have
at home, and would do well to go the hundred or the thousand miles to
escape.  Would he urge people to a godly way of living; -- and can he
ask a fellow-creature to come to Sabbath meetings, when he and they
all know what is the poor uttermost they can hope for therein?  Will
he invite them privately to the Lord's Supper?  He dares not.  If no
heart warm this rite, the hollow, dry, creaking formality is too
plain, than that he can face a man of wit and energy, and put the
invitation without terror.  In the street, what has he to say to the
bold village blasphemer?  The village blasphemer sees fear in the
face, form, and gait of the minister.

        Let me not taint the sincerity of this plea by any oversight of
the claims of good men.  I know and honor the purity and strict
conscience of numbers of the clergy.  What life the public worship
retains, it owes to the scattered company of pious men, who minister
here and there in the churches, and who, sometimes accepting with too
great tenderness the tenet of the elders, have not accepted from
others, but from their own heart, the genuine impulses of virtue, and
so still command our love and awe, to the sanctity of character.
Moreover, the exceptions are not so much to be found in a few eminent
preachers, as in the better hours, the truer inspirations of all, --
nay, in the sincere moments of every man.  But with whatever
exception, it is still true, that tradition characterizes the
preaching of this country; that it comes out of the memory, and not
out of the soul; that it aims at what is usual, and not at what is
necessary and eternal; that thus, historical Christianity destroys
the power of preaching, by withdrawing it from the exploration of the
moral nature of man, where the sublime is, where are the resources of
astonishment and power.  What a cruel injustice it is to that Law,
the joy of the whole earth, which alone can make thought dear and
rich; that Law whose fatal sureness the astronomical orbits poorly
emulate, that it is travestied and depreciated, that it is behooted
and behowled, and not a trait, not a word of it articulated.  The
pulpit in losing sight of this Law, loses its reason, and gropes
after it knows not what.  And for want of this culture, the soul of
the community is sick and faithless.  It wants nothing so much as a
stern, high, stoical, Christian discipline, to make it know itself
and the divinity that speaks through it.  Now man is ashamed of
himself; he skulks and sneaks through the world, to be tolerated, to
be pitied, and scarcely in a thousand years does any man dare to be
wise and good, and so draw after him the tears and blessings of his
kind.

        Certainly there have been periods when, from the inactivity of
the intellect on certain truths, a greater faith was possible in
names and persons.  The Puritans in England and America, found in the
Christ of the Catholic Church, and in the dogmas inherited from Rome,
scope for their austere piety, and their longings for civil freedom.
But their creed is passing away, and none arises in its room.  I
think no man can go with his thoughts about him, into one of our
churches, without feeling, that what hold the public worship had on
men is gone, or going.  It has lost its grasp on the affection of the
good, and the fear of the bad.  In the country, neighborhoods, half
parishes are _signing off_, -- to use the local term.  It is already
beginning to indicate character and religion to withdraw from the
religious meetings.  I have heard a devout person, who prized the
Sabbath, say in bitterness of heart, "On Sundays, it seems wicked to
go to church." And the motive, that holds the best there, is now only
a hope and a waiting.  What was once a mere circumstance, that the
best and the worst men in the parish, the poor and the rich, the
learned and the ignorant, young and old, should meet one day as
fellows in one house, in sign of an equal right in the soul, -- has
come to be a paramount motive for going thither.

        My friends, in these two errors, I think, I find the causes of
a decaying church and a wasting unbelief.  And what greater calamity
can fall upon a nation, than the loss of worship?  Then all things go
to decay.  Genius leaves the temple, to haunt the senate, or the
market.  Literature becomes frivolous.  Science is cold.  The eye of
youth is not lighted by the hope of other worlds, and age is without
honor.  Society lives to trifles, and when men die, we do not mention
them.

        And now, my brothers, you will ask, What in these desponding
days can be done by us?  The remedy is already declared in the ground
of our complaint of the Church.  We have contrasted the Church with
the Soul.  In the soul, then, let the redemption be sought.  Wherever
a man comes, there comes revolution.  The old is for slaves.  When a
man comes, all books are legible, all things transparent, all
religions are forms.  He is religious.  Man is the wonderworker.  He
is seen amid miracles.  All men bless and curse.  He saith yea and
nay, only.  The stationariness of religion; the assumption that the
age of inspiration is past, that the Bible is closed; the fear of
degrading the character of Jesus by representing him as a man;
indicate with sufficient clearness the falsehood of our theology.  It
is the office of a true teacher to show us that God is, not was; that
He speaketh, not spake.  The true Christianity, -- a faith like
Christ's in the infinitude of man, -- is lost.  None believeth in the
soul of man, but only in some man or person old and departed.  Ah me!
no man goeth alone.  All men go in flocks to this saint or that poet,
avoiding the God who seeth in secret.  They cannot see in secret;
they love to be blind in public.  They think society wiser than their
soul, and know not that one soul, and their soul, is wiser than the
whole world.  See how nations and races flit by on the sea of time,
and leave no ripple to tell where they floated or sunk, and one good
soul shall make the name of Moses, or of Zeno, or of Zoroaster,
reverend forever.  None assayeth the stern ambition to be the Self of
the nation, and of nature, but each would be an easy secondary to
some Christian scheme, or sectarian connection, or some eminent man.
Once leave your own knowledge of God, your own sentiment, and take
secondary knowledge, as St. Paul's, or George Fox's, or Swedenborg's,
and you get wide from God with every year this secondary form lasts,
and if, as now, for centuries, -- the chasm yawns to that breadth,
that men can scarcely be convinced there is in them anything divine.

        Let me admonish you, first of all, to go alone; to refuse the
good models, even those which are sacred in the imagination of men,
and dare to love God without mediator or veil.  Friends enough you
shall find who will hold up to your emulation Wesleys and Oberlins,
Saints and Prophets.  Thank God for these good men, but say, `I also
am a man.' Imitation cannot go above its model.  The imitator dooms
himself to hopeless mediocrity.  The inventor did it, because it was
natural to him, and so in him it has a charm.  In the imitator,
something else is natural, and he bereaves himself of his own beauty,
to come short of another man's.

        Yourself a newborn bard of the Holy Ghost, -- cast behind you
all conformity, and acquaint men at first hand with Deity.  Look to
it first and only, that fashion, custom, authority, pleasure, and
money, are nothing to you, -- are not bandages over your eyes, that
you cannot see, -- but live with the privilege of the immeasurable
mind.  Not too anxious to visit periodically all families and each
family in your parish connection, -- when you meet one of these men
or women, be to them a divine man; be to them thought and virtue; let
their timid aspirations find in you a friend; let their trampled
instincts be genially tempted out in your atmosphere; let their
doubts know that you have doubted, and their wonder feel that you
have wondered.  By trusting your own heart, you shall gain more
confidence in other men.  For all our penny-wisdom, for all our
soul-destroying slavery to habit, it is not to be doubted, that all
men have sublime thoughts; that all men value the few real hours of
life; they love to be heard; they love to be caught up into the
vision of principles.  We mark with light in the memory the few
interviews we have had, in the dreary years of routine and of sin,
with souls that made our souls wiser; that spoke what we thought;
that told us what we knew; that gave us leave to be what we inly
were.  Discharge to men the priestly office, and, present or absent,
you shall be followed with their love as by an angel.

        And, to this end, let us not aim at common degrees of merit.
Can we not leave, to such as love it, the virtue that glitters for
the commendation of society, and ourselves pierce the deep solitudes
of absolute ability and worth?  We easily come up to the standard of
goodness in society.  Society's praise can be cheaply secured, and
almost all men are content with those easy merits; but the instant
effect of conversing with God, will be, to put them away.  There are
persons who are not actors, not speakers, but influences; persons too
great for fame, for display; who disdain eloquence; to whom all we
call art and artist, seems too nearly allied to show and by-ends, to
the exaggeration of the finite and selfish, and loss of the
universal.  The orators, the poets, the commanders encroach on us
only as fair women do, by our allowance and homage.  Slight them by
preoccupation of mind, slight them, as you can well afford to do, by
high and universal aims, and they instantly feel that you have right,
and that it is in lower places that they must shine.  They also feel
your right; for they with you are open to the influx of the
all-knowing Spirit, which annihilates before its broad noon the
little shades and gradations of intelligence in the compositions we
call wiser and wisest.

        In such high communion, let us study the grand strokes of
rectitude: a bold benevolence, an independence of friends, so that
not the unjust wishes of those who love us, shall impair our freedom,
but we shall resist for truth's sake the freest flow of kindness, and
appeal to sympathies far in advance; and, -- what is the highest form
in which we know this beautiful element, -- a certain solidity of
merit, that has nothing to do with opinion, and which is so
essentially and manifestly virtue, that it is taken for granted, that
the right, the brave, the generous step will be taken by it, and
nobody thinks of commending it.  You would compliment a coxcomb doing
a good act, but you would not praise an angel.  The silence that
accepts merit as the most natural thing in the world, is the highest
applause.  Such souls, when they appear, are the Imperial Guard of
Virtue, the perpetual reserve, the dictators of fortune.  One needs
not praise their courage, -- they are the heart and soul of nature.
O my friends, there are resources in us on which we have not drawn.
There are men who rise refreshed on hearing a threat; men to whom a
crisis which intimidates and paralyzes the majority, -- demanding not
the faculties of prudence and thrift, but comprehension,
immovableness, the readiness of sacrifice, -- comes graceful and
beloved as a bride.  Napoleon said of Massena, that he was not
himself until the battle began to go against him; then, when the dead
began to fall in ranks around him, awoke his powers of combination,
and he put on terror and victory as a robe.  So it is in rugged
crises, in unweariable endurance, and in aims which put sympathy out
of question, that the angel is shown.  But these are heights that we
can scarce remember and look up to, without contrition and shame.
Let us thank God that such things exist.

        And now let us do what we can to rekindle the smouldering, nigh
quenched fire on the altar.  The evils of the church that now is are
manifest.  The question returns, What shall we do?  I confess, all
attempts to project and establish a Cultus with new rites and forms,
seem to me vain.  Faith makes us, and not we it, and faith makes its
own forms.  All attempts to contrive a system are as cold as the new
worship introduced by the French to the goddess of Reason, -- to-day,
pasteboard and fillagree, and ending to-morrow in madness and murder.
Rather let the breath of new life be breathed by you through the
forms already existing.  For, if once you are alive, you shall find
they shall become plastic and new.  The remedy to their deformity is,
first, soul, and second, soul, and evermore, soul.  A whole popedom
of forms, one pulsation of virtue can uplift and vivify.  Two
inestimable advantages Christianity has given us; first; the Sabbath,
the jubilee of the whole world; whose light dawns welcome alike into
the closet of the philosopher, into the garret of toil, and into
prison cells, and everywhere suggests, even to the vile, the dignity
of spiritual being.  Let it stand forevermore, a temple, which new
love, new faith, new sight shall restore to more than its first
splendor to mankind.  And secondly, the institution of preaching, --
the speech of man to men, -- essentially the most flexible of all
organs, of all forms.  What hinders that now, everywhere, in pulpits,
in lecture-rooms, in houses, in fields, wherever the invitation of
men or your own occasions lead you, you speak the very truth, as your
life and conscience teach it, and cheer the waiting, fainting hearts
of men with new hope and new revelation?

        I look for the hour when that supreme Beauty, which ravished
the souls of those eastern men, and chiefly of those Hebrews, and
through their lips spoke oracles to all time, shall speak in the West
also.  The Hebrew and Greek Scriptures contain immortal sentences,
that have been bread of life to millions.  But they have no epical
integrity; are fragmentary; are not shown in their order to the
intellect.  I look for the new Teacher, that shall follow so far
those shining laws, that he shall see them come full circle; shall
see their rounding complete grace; shall see the world to be the
mirror of the soul; shall see the identity of the law of gravitation
with purity of heart; and shall show that the Ought, that Duty, is
one thing with Science, with Beauty, and with Joy.

.
 
        THE METHOD OF NATURE
 
        _An Oration delivered before the Society of the Adelphi, in
Waterville College, Maine, August 11, 1841_

        GENTLEMEN,
        Let us exchange congratulations on the enjoyments and the pros
literary anniversary.  The land we live in has no interest so dear,
if it knew its want, as the fit consecration of days of reason and
thought.  Where there is no vision, the people perish.  The scholars
are the priests of that thought which establishes the foundations of
the earth.  No matter what is their special work or profession, they
stand for the spiritual interest of the world, and it is a common
calamity if they neglect their post in a country where the material
interest is so predominant as it is in America.  We hear something
too much of the results of machinery, commerce, and the useful arts.
We are a puny and a fickle folk.  Avarice, hesitation, and following,
are our diseases.  The rapid wealth which hundreds in the community
acquire in trade, or by the incessant expansions of our population
and arts, enchants the eyes of all the rest; the luck of one is the
hope of thousands, and the bribe acts like the neighborhood of a gold
mine to impoverish the farm, the school, the church, the house, and
the very body and feature of man.

        I do not wish to look with sour aspect at the industrious
manufacturing village, or the mart of commerce.  I love the music of
the water-wheel; I value the railway; I feel the pride which the
sight of a ship inspires; I look on trade and every mechanical craft
as education also.  But let me discriminate what is precious herein.
There is in each of these works an act of invention, an intellectual
step, or short series of steps taken; that act or step is the
spiritual act; all the rest is mere repetition of the same a thousand
times.  And I will not be deceived into admiring the routine of
handicrafts and mechanics, how splendid soever the result, any more
than I admire the routine of the scholars or clerical class.  That
splendid results ensue from the labors of stupid men, is the fruit of
higher laws than their will, and the routine is not to be praised for
it.  I would not have the laborer sacrificed to the result, -- I
would not have the laborer sacrificed to my convenience and pride,
nor to that of a great class of such as me.  Let there be worse
cotton and better men.  The weaver should not be bereaved of his
superiority to his work, and his knowledge that the product or the
skill is of no value, except so far as it embodies his spiritual
prerogatives.  If I see nothing to admire in the unit, shall I admire
a million units?  Men stand in awe of the city, but do not honor any
individual citizen; and are continually yielding to this dazzling
result of numbers, that which they would never yield to the solitary
example of any one.

        Whilst the multitude of men degrade each other, and give
currency to desponding doctrines, the scholar must be a bringer of
hope, and must reinforce man against himself.  I sometimes believe
that our literary anniversaries will presently assume a greater
importance, as the eyes of men open to their capabilities.  Here, a
new set of distinctions, a new order of ideas, prevail.  Here, we set
a bound to the respectability of wealth, and a bound to the
pretensions of the law and the church.  The bigot must cease to be a
bigot to-day.  Into our charmed circle, power cannot enter; and the
sturdiest defender of existing institutions feels the terrific
inflammability of this air which condenses heat in every corner that
may restore to the elements the fabrics of ages.  Nothing solid is
secure; every thing tilts and rocks.  Even the scholar is not safe;
he too is searched and revised.  Is his learning dead?  Is he living
in his memory?  The power of mind is not mortification, but life.
But come forth, thou curious child! hither, thou loving, all-hoping
poet! hither, thou tender, doubting heart, who hast not yet found any
place in the world's market fit for thee; any wares which thou
couldst buy or sell, -- so large is thy love and ambition, -- thine
and not theirs is the hour.  Smooth thy brow, and hope and love on,
for the kind heaven justifies thee, and the whole world feels that
thou art in the right.

        We ought to celebrate this hour by expressions of manly joy.
Not thanks, not prayer seem quite the highest or truest name for our
communication with the infinite, -- but glad and conspiring
reception, -- reception that becomes giving in its turn, as the
receiver is only the All-Giver in part and in infancy.  I cannot, --
nor can any man, -- speak precisely of things so sublime, but it
seems to me, the wit of man, his strength, his grace, his tendency,
his art, is the grace and the presence of God.  It is beyond
explanation.  When all is said and done, the rapt saint is found the
only logician.  Not exhortation, not argument becomes our lips, but
paeans of joy and praise.  But not of adulation: we are too nearly
related in the deep of the mind to that we honor.  It is God in us
which checks the language of petition by a grander thought.  In the
bottom of the heart, it is said; `I am, and by me, O child! this fair
body and world of thine stands and grows.  I am; all things are mine:
and all mine are thine.'

        The festival of the intellect, and the return to its source,
cast a strong light on the always interesting topics of Man and
Nature.  We are forcibly reminded of the old want.  There is no man;
there hath never been.  The Intellect still asks that a man may be
born.  The flame of life flickers feebly in human breasts.  We demand
of men a richness and universality we do not find.  Great men do not
content us.  It is their solitude, not their force, that makes them
conspicuous.  There is somewhat indigent and tedious about them.
They are poorly tied to one thought.  If they are prophets, they are
egotists; if polite and various, they are shallow.  How tardily men
arrive at any result! how tardily they pass from it to another!  The
crystal sphere of thought is as concentrical as the geological
structure of the globe.  As our soils and rocks lie in strata,
concentric strata, so do all men's thinkings run laterally, never
vertically.  Here comes by a great inquisitor with auger and
plumb-line, and will bore an Artesian well through our conventions
and theories, and pierce to the core of things.  But as soon as he
probes the crust, behold gimlet, plumb-line, and philosopher take a
lateral direction, in spite of all resistance, as if some strong wind
took everything off its feet, and if you come month after month to
see what progress our reformer has made, -- not an inch has he
pierced, -- you still find him with new words in the old place,
floating about in new parts of the same old vein or crust.  The new
book says, `I will give you the key to nature,' and we expect to go
like a thunderbolt to the centre.  But the thunder is a surface
phenomenon, makes a skin-deep cut, and so does the sage.  The wedge
turns out to be a rocket.  Thus a man lasts but a very little while,
for his monomania becomes insupportably tedious in a few months.  It
is so with every book and person: and yet -- and yet -- we do not
take up a new book, or meet a new man, without a pulse-beat of
expectation.  And this invincible hope of a more adequate interpreter
is the sure prediction of his advent.

        In the absence of man, we turn to nature, which stands next.
In the divine order, intellect is primary; nature, secondary; it is
the memory of the mind.  That which once existed in intellect as pure
law, has now taken body as Nature.  It existed already in the mind in
solution; now, it has been precipitated, and the bright sediment is
the world.  We can never be quite strangers or inferiors in nature.
It is flesh of our flesh, and bone of our bone.  But we no longer
hold it by the hand; we have lost our miraculous power; our arm is no
more as strong as the frost; nor our will equivalent to gravity and
the elective attractions.  Yet we can use nature as a convenient
standard, and the meter of our rise and fall.  It has this advantage
as a witness, it cannot be debauched.  When man curses, nature still
testifies to truth and love.  We may, therefore, safely study the
mind in nature, because we cannot steadily gaze on it in mind; as we
explore the face of the sun in a pool, when our eyes cannot brook his
direct splendors.

        It seems to me, therefore, that it were some suitable paean, if
we should piously celebrate this hour by exploring the _method of
nature_.  Let us see _that_, as nearly as we can, and try how far it
is transferable to the literary life.  Every earnest glance we give
to the realities around us, with intent to learn, proceeds from a
holy impulse, and is really songs of praise.  What difference can it
make whether it take the shape of exhortation, or of passionate
exclamation, or of scientific statement?  These are forms merely.
Through them we express, at last, the fact, that God has done thus or
thus.

        In treating a subject so large, in which we must necessarily
appeal to the intuition, and aim much more to suggest, than to
describe, I know it is not easy to speak with the precision
attainable on topics of less scope.  I do not wish in attempting to
paint a man, to describe an air-fed, unimpassioned, impossible ghost.
My eyes and ears are revolted by any neglect of the physical facts,
the limitations of man.  And yet one who conceives the true order of
nature, and beholds the visible as proceeding from the invisible,
cannot state his thought, without seeming to those who study the
physical laws, to do them some injustice.  There is an intrinsic
defect in the organ.  Language overstates.  Statements of the
infinite are usually felt to be unjust to the finite, and
blasphemous.  Empedocles undoubtedly spoke a truth of thought, when
he said, "I am God;" but the moment it was out of his mouth, it
became a lie to the ear; and the world revenged itself for the
seeming arrogance, by the good story about his shoe.  How can I hope
for better hap in my attempts to enunciate spiritual facts?  Yet let
us hope, that as far as we receive the truth, so far shall we be felt
by every true person to say what is just.

        The method of nature: who could ever analyze it?  That rushing
stream will not stop to be observed.  We can never surprise nature in
a corner; never find the end of a thread; never tell where to set the
first stone.  The bird hastens to lay her egg: the egg hastens to be
a bird.  The wholeness we admire in the order of the world, is the
result of infinite distribution.  Its smoothness is the smoothness of
the pitch of the cataract.  Its permanence is a perpetual inchoation.
Every natural fact is an emanation, and that from which it emanates
is an emanation also, and from every emanation is a new emanation.
If anything could stand still, it would be crushed and dissipated by
the torrent it resisted, and if it were a mind, would be crazed; as
insane persons are those who hold fast to one thought, and do not
flow with the course of nature.  Not the cause, but an ever novel
effect, nature descends always from above.  It is unbroken obedience.
The beauty of these fair objects is imported into them from a
metaphysical and eternal spring.  In all animal and vegetable forms,
the physiologist concedes that no chemistry, no mechanics, can
account for the facts, but a mysterious principle of life must be
assumed, which not only inhabits the organ, but makes the organ.

        How silent, how spacious, what room for all, yet without place
to insert an atom, -- in graceful succession, in equal fulness, in
balanced beauty, the dance of the hours goes forward still.  Like an
odor of incense, like a strain of music, like a sleep, it is inexact
and boundless.  It will not be dissected, nor unravelled, nor shown.
Away profane philosopher! seekest thou in nature the cause?  This
refers to that, and that to the next, and the next to the third, and
everything refers.  Thou must ask in another mood, thou must feel it
and love it, thou must behold it in a spirit as grand as that by
which it exists, ere thou canst know the law.  Known it will not be,
but gladly beloved and enjoyed.

        The simultaneous life throughout the whole body, the equal
serving of innumerable ends without the least emphasis or preference
to any, but the steady degradation of each to the success of all,
allows the understanding no place to work.  Nature can only be
conceived as existing to a universal and not to a particular end, to
a universe of ends, and not to one, -- a work of _ecstasy_, to be
represented by a circular movement, as intention might be signified
by a straight line of definite length.  Each effect strengthens every
other.  There is no revolt in all the kingdoms from the commonweal:
no detachment of an individual.  Hence the catholic character which
makes every leaf an exponent of the world.  When we behold the
landscape in a poetic spirit, we do not reckon individuals.  Nature
knows neither palm nor oak, but only vegetable life, which sprouts
into forests, and festoons the globe with a garland of grasses and
vines.

        That no single end may be selected, and nature judged thereby,
appears from this, that if man himself be considered as the end, and
it be assumed that the final cause of the world is to make holy or
wise or beautiful men, we see that it has not succeeded.  Read
alternately in natural and in civil history, a treatise of astronomy,
for example, with a volume of French _Memoires pour servir_.  When we
have spent our wonder in computing this wasteful hospitality with
which boon nature turns off new firmaments without end into her wide
common, as fast as the madrepores make coral, -- suns and planets
hospitable to souls, -- and then shorten the sight to look into this
court of Louis Quatorze, and see the game that is played there, --
duke and marshal, abbe and madame, -- a gambling table where each is
laying traps for the other, where the end is ever by some lie or
fetch to outwit your rival and ruin him with this solemn fop in wig
and stars, -- the king; one can hardly help asking if this planet is
a fair specimen of the so generous astronomy, and if so, whether the
experiment have not failed, and whether it be quite worth while to
make more, and glut the innocent space with so poor an article.

        I think we feel not much otherwise if, instead of beholding
foolish nations, we take the great and wise men, the eminent souls,
and narrowly inspect their biography.  None of them seen by himself
-- and his performance compared with his promise or idea, will
justify the cost of that enormous apparatus of means by which this
spotted and defective person was at last procured.

        To questions of this sort, nature replies, `I grow.' All is
nascent, infant.  When we are dizzied with the arithmetic of the
savant toiling to compute the length of her line, the return of her
curve, we are steadied by the perception that a great deal is doing;
that all seems just begun; remote aims are in active accomplishment.
We can point nowhere to anything final; but tendency appears on all
hands: planet, system, constellation, total nature is growing like a
field of maize in July; is becoming somewhat else; is in rapid
metamorphosis.  The embryo does not more strive to be man, than
yonder burr of light we call a nebula tends to be a ring, a comet, a
globe, and parent of new stars.  Why should not then these messieurs
of Versailles strut and plot for tabourets and ribbons, for a season,
without prejudice to their faculty to run on better errands by and
by?

        But nature seems further to reply, `I have ventured so great a
stake as my success, in no single creature.  I have not yet arrived
at any end.  The gardener aims to produce a fine peach or pear, but
my aim is the health of the whole tree, -- root, stem, leaf, flower,
and seed, -- and by no means the pampering of a monstrous pericarp at
the expense of all the other functions.'

        In short, the spirit and peculiarity of that impression nature
makes on us, is this, that it does not exist to any one or to any
number of particular ends, but to numberless and endless benefit;
that there is in it no private will, no rebel leaf or limb, but the
whole is oppressed by one superincumbent tendency, obeys that
redundancy or excess of life which in conscious beings we call
_ecstasy_.

        With this conception of the genius or method of nature, let us
go back to man.  It is true, he pretends to give account of himself
to himself, but, at last, what has he to recite but the fact that
there is a Life not to be described or known otherwise than by
possession?  What account can he give of his essence more than _so it
was to be_?  The _royal_ reason, the Grace of God seems the only
description of our multiform but ever identical fact.  There is
virtue, there is genius, there is success, or there is not.  There is
the incoming or the receding of God: that is all we can affirm; and
we can show neither how nor why.  Self-accusation, remorse, and the
didactic morals of self-denial and strife with sin, is a view we are
constrained by our constitution to take of the fact seen from the
platform of action; but seen from the platform of intellection, there
is nothing for us but praise and wonder.

        The termination of the world in a man, appears to be the last
victory of intelligence.  The universal does not attract us until
housed in an individual.  Who heeds the waste abyss of possibility?
The ocean is everywhere the same, but it has no character until seen
with the shore or the ship.  Who would value any number of miles of
Atlantic brine bounded by lines of latitude and longitude?  Confine
it by granite rocks, let it wash a shore where wise men dwell, and it
is filled with expression; and the point of greatest interest is
where the land and water meet.  So must we admire in man, the form of
the formless, the concentration of the vast, the house of reason, the
cave of memory.  See the play of thoughts! what nimble gigantic
creatures are these! what saurians, what palaiotheria shall be named
with these agile movers?  The great Pan of old, who was clothed in a
leopard skin to signify the beautiful variety of things, and the
firmament, his coat of stars, -- was but the representative of thee,
O rich and various Man! thou palace of sight and sound, carrying in
thy senses the morning and the night and the unfathomable galaxy; in
thy brain, the geometry of the City of God; in thy heart, the bower
of love and the realms of right and wrong.  An individual man is a
fruit which it cost all the foregoing ages to form and ripen.  The
history of the genesis or the old mythology repeats itself in the
experience of every child.  He too is a demon or god thrown into a
particular chaos, where he strives ever to lead things from disorder
into order.  Each individual soul is such, in virtue of its being a
power to translate the world into some particular language of its
own; if not into a picture, a statue, or a dance, -- why, then, into
a trade, an art, a science, a mode of living, a conversation, a
character, an influence.  You admire pictures, but it is as
impossible for you to paint a right picture, as for grass to bear
apples.  But when the genius comes, it makes fingers: it is pliancy,
and the power of transferring the affair in the street into oils and
colors.  Raphael must be born, and Salvator must be born.

        There is no attractiveness like that of a new man.  The sleepy
nations are occupied with their political routine.  England, France
and America read Parliamentary Debates, which no high genius now
enlivens; and nobody will read them who trusts his own eye: only they
who are deceived by the popular repetition of distinguished names.
But when Napoleon unrolls his map, the eye is commanded by original
power.  When Chatham leads the debate, men may well listen, because
they must listen.  A man, a personal ascendency is the only great
phenomenon.  When nature has work to be done, she creates a genius to
do it.  Follow the great man, and you shall see what the world has at
heart in these ages.  There is no omen like that.

        But what strikes us in the fine genius is that which belongs of
right to every one.  A man should know himself for a necessary actor.
A link was wanting between two craving parts of nature, and he was
hurled into being as the bridge over that yawning need, the mediator
betwixt two else unmarriageable facts.  His two parents held each of
one of the wants, and the union of foreign constitutions in him
enables him to do gladly and gracefully what the assembled human race
could not have sufficed to do.  He knows his materials; he applies
himself to his work; he cannot read, or think, or look, but he unites
the hitherto separated strands into a perfect cord.  The thoughts he
delights to utter are the reason of his incarnation.  Is it for him
to account himself cheap and superfluous, or to linger by the wayside
for opportunities?  Did he not come into being because something must
be done which he and no other is and does?  If only he _sees_, the
world will be visible enough.  He need not study where to stand, nor
to put things in favorable lights; in him is the light, from him all
things are illuminated, to their centre.  What patron shall he ask
for employment and reward?  Hereto was he born, to deliver the
thought of his heart from the universe to the universe, to do an
office which nature could not forego, nor he be discharged from
rendering, and then immerge again into the holy silence and eternity
out of which as a man he arose.  God is rich, and many more men than
one he harbors in his bosom, biding their time and the needs and the
beauty of all.  Is not this the theory of every man's genius or
faculty?  Why then goest thou as some Boswell or listening worshipper
to this saint or to that?  That is the only lese-majesty.  Here art
thou with whom so long the universe travailed in labor; darest thou
think meanly of thyself whom the stalwart Fate brought forth to unite
his ragged sides, to shoot the gulf, to reconcile the irreconcilable?

        Whilst a necessity so great caused the man to exist, his health
and erectness consist in the fidelity with which he transmits
influences from the vast and universal to the point on which his
genius can act.  The ends are momentary: they are vents for the
current of inward life which increases as it is spent.  A man's
wisdom is to know that all ends are momentary, that the best end must
be superseded by a better.  But there is a mischievous tendency in
him to transfer his thought from the life to the ends, to quit his
agency and rest in his acts: the tools run away with the workman, the
human with the divine.  I conceive a man as always spoken to from
behind, and unable to turn his head and see the speaker.  In all the
millions who have heard the voice, none ever saw the face.  As
children in their play run behind each other, and seize one by the
ears and make him walk before them, so is the spirit our unseen
pilot.  That well-known voice speaks in all languages, governs all
men, and none ever caught a glimpse of its form.  If the man will
exactly obey it, it will adopt him, so that he shall not any longer
separate it from himself in his thought, he shall seem to be it, he
shall be it.  If he listen with insatiable ears, richer and greater
wisdom is taught him, the sound swells to a ravishing music, he is
borne away as with a flood, he becomes careless of his food and of
his house, he is the fool of ideas, and leads a heavenly life.  But
if his eye is set on the things to be done, and not on the truth that
is still taught, and for the sake of which the things are to be done,
then the voice grows faint, and at last is but a humming in his ears.
His health and greatness consist in his being the channel through
which heaven flows to earth, in short, in the fulness in which an
ecstatical state takes place in him.  It is pitiful to be an artist,
when, by forbearing to be artists, we might be vessels filled with
the divine overflowings, enriched by the circulations of omniscience
and omnipresence.  Are there not moments in the history of heaven
when the human race was not counted by individuals, but was only the
Influenced, was God in distribution, God rushing into multiform
benefit?  It is sublime to receive, sublime to love, but this lust of
imparting as from _us_, this desire to be loved, the wish to be
recognized as individuals, -- is finite, comes of a lower strain.

        Shall I say, then, that, as far as we can trace the natural
history of the soul, its health consists in the fulness of its
reception, -- call it piety, call it veneration -- in the fact, that
enthusiasm is organized therein.  What is best in any work of art,
but that part which the work itself seems to require and do; that
which the man cannot do again, that which flows from the hour and the
occasion, like the eloquence of men in a tumultuous debate?  It was
always the theory of literature, that the word of a poet was
authoritative and final.  He was supposed to be the mouth of a divine
wisdom.  We rather envied his circumstance than his talent.  We too
could have gladly prophesied standing in that place.  We so quote our
Scriptures; and the Greeks so quoted Homer, Theognis, Pindar, and the
rest.  If the theory has receded out of modern criticism, it is
because we have not had poets.  Whenever they appear, they will
redeem their own credit.

        This ecstatical state seems to direct a regard to the whole and
not to the parts; to the cause and not to the ends; to the tendency,
and not to the act.  It respects genius and not talent; hope, and not
possession: the anticipation of all things by the intellect, and not
the history itself; art, and not works of art; poetry, and not
experiment; virtue, and not duties.

        There is no office or function of man but is rightly discharged
by this divine method, and nothing that is not noxious to him if
detached from its universal relations.  Is it his work in the world
to study nature, or the laws of the world?  Let him beware of
proposing to himself any end.  Is it for use?  nature is debased, as
if one looking at the ocean can remember only the price of fish.  Or
is it for pleasure? he is mocked: there is a certain infatuating air
in woods and mountains which draws on the idler to want and misery.
There is something social and intrusive in the nature of all things;
they seek to penetrate and overpower, each the nature of every other
creature, and itself alone in all modes and throughout space and
spirit to prevail and possess.  Every star in heaven is discontented
and insatiable.  Gravitation and chemistry cannot content them.  Ever
they woo and court the eye of every beholder.  Every man who comes
into the world they seek to fascinate and possess, to pass into his
mind, for they desire to republish themselves in a more delicate
world than that they occupy.  It is not enough that they are Jove,
Mars, Orion, and the North Star, in the gravitating firmament: they
would have such poets as Newton, Herschel and Laplace, that they may
re-exist and re-appear in the finer world of rational souls, and fill
that realm with their fame.  So is it with all immaterial objects.
These beautiful basilisks set their brute, glorious eyes on the eye
of every child, and, if they can, cause their nature to pass through
his wondering eyes into him, and so all things are mixed.

        Therefore man must be on his guard against this cup of
enchantments, and must look at nature with a supernatural eye.  By
piety alone, by conversing with the cause of nature, is he safe and
commands it.  And because all knowledge is assimilation to the object
of knowledge, as the power or genius of nature is ecstatic, so must
its science or the description of it be.  The poet must be a
rhapsodist: his inspiration a sort of bright casualty: his will in it
only the surrender of will to the Universal Power, which will not be
seen face to face, but must be received and sympathetically known.
It is remarkable that we have out of the deeps of antiquity in the
oracles ascribed to the half fabulous Zoroaster, a statement of this
fact, which every lover and seeker of truth will recognize.  "It is
not proper," said Zoroaster, "to understand the Intelligible with
vehemence, but if you incline your mind, you will apprehend it: not
too earnestly, but bringing a pure and inquiring eye.  You will not
understand it as when understanding some particular thing, but with
the flower of the mind.  Things divine are not attainable by mortals
who understand sensual things, but only the light-armed arrive at the
summit."

        And because ecstasy is the law and cause of nature, therefore
you cannot interpret it in too high and deep a sense.  Nature
represents the best meaning of the wisest man.  Does the sunset
landscape seem to you the palace of Friendship, -- those purple skies
and lovely waters the amphitheatre dressed and garnished only for the
exchange of thought and love of the purest souls?  It is that.  All
other meanings which base men have put on it are conjectural and
false.  You cannot bathe twice in the same river, said Heraclitus;
and I add, a man never sees the same object twice: with his own
enlargement the object acquires new aspects.

        Does not the same law hold for virtue?  It is vitiated by too
much will.  He who aims at progress, should aim at an infinite, not
at a special benefit.  The reforms whose fame now fills the land with
Temperance, Anti-Slavery, Non-Resistance, No Government, Equal Labor,
fair and generous as each appears, are poor bitter things when
prosecuted for themselves as an end.  To every reform, in proportion
to its energy, early disgusts are incident, so that the disciple is
surprised at the very hour of his first triumphs, with chagrins, and
sickness, and a general distrust: so that he shuns his associates,
hates the enterprise which lately seemed so fair, and meditates to
cast himself into the arms of that society and manner of life which
he had newly abandoned with so much pride and hope.  Is it that he
attached the value of virtue to some particular practices, as, the
denial of certain appetites in certain specified indulgences, and,
afterward, found himself still as wicked and as far from happiness in
that abstinence, as he had been in the abuse?  But the soul can be
appeased not by a deed but by a tendency.  It is in a hope that she
feels her wings.  You shall love rectitude and not the disuse of
money or the avoidance of trade: an unimpeded mind, and not a monkish
diet; sympathy and usefulness, and not hoeing or coopering.  Tell me
not how great your project is, the civil liberation of the world, its
conversion into a Christian church, the establishment of public
education, cleaner diet, a new division of labor and of land, laws of
love for laws of property; -- I say to you plainly there is no end to
which your practical faculty can aim, so sacred or so large, that, if
pursued for itself, will not at last become carrion and an offence to
the nostril.  The imaginative faculty of the soul must be fed with
objects immense and eternal.  Your end should be one inapprehensible
to the senses: then will it be a god always approached, -- never
touched; always giving health.  A man adorns himself with prayer and
love, as an aim adorns an action.  What is strong but goodness, and
what is energetic but the presence of a brave man?  The doctrine in
vegetable physiology of the _presence_, or the general influence of
any substance over and above its chemical influence, as of an alkali
or a living plant, is more predicable of man.  You need not speak to
me, I need not go where you are, that you should exert magnetism on
me.  Be you only whole and sufficient, and I shall feel you in every
part of my life and fortune, and I can as easily dodge the
gravitation of the globe as escape your influence.

        But there are other examples of this total and supreme
influence, besides Nature and the conscience.  "From the poisonous
tree, the world," say the Brahmins, "two species of fruit are
produced, sweet as the waters of life, Love or the society of
beautiful souls, and Poetry, whose taste is like the immortal juice
of Vishnu." What is Love, and why is it the chief good, but because
it is an overpowering enthusiasm?  Never self-possessed or prudent,
it is all abandonment.  Is it not a certain admirable wisdom,
preferable to all other advantages, and whereof all others are only
secondaries and indemnities, because this is that in which the
individual is no longer his own foolish master, but inhales an
odorous and celestial air, is wrapped round with awe of the object,
blending for the time that object with the real and only good, and
consults every omen in nature with tremulous interest.  When we speak
truly, -- is not he only unhappy who is not in love? his fancied
freedom and self-rule -- is it not so much death?  He who is in love
is wise and is becoming wiser, sees newly every time he looks at the
object beloved, drawing from it with his eyes and his mind those
virtues which it possesses.  Therefore if the object be not itself a
living and expanding soul, he presently exhausts it.  But the love
remains in his mind, and the wisdom it brought him; and it craves a
new and higher object.  And the reason why all men honor love, is
because it looks up and not down; aspires and not despairs.

        And what is Genius but finer love, a love impersonal, a love of
the flower and perfection of things, and a desire to draw a new
picture or copy of the same?  It looks to the cause and life: it
proceeds from within outward, whilst Talent goes from without inward.
Talent finds its models, methods, and ends, in society, exists for
exhibition, and goes to the soul only for power to work.  Genius is
its own end, and draws its means and the style of its architecture
from within, going abroad only for audience, and spectator, as we
adapt our voice and phrase to the distance and character of the ear
we speak to.  All your learning of all literatures would never enable
you to anticipate one of its thoughts or expressions, and yet each is
natural and familiar as household words.  Here about us coils forever
the ancient enigma, so old and so unutterable.  Behold! there is the
sun, and the rain, and the rocks: the old sun, the old stones.  How
easy were it to describe all this fitly; yet no word can pass.
Nature is a mute, and man, her articulate speaking brother, lo! he
also is a mute.  Yet when Genius arrives, its speech is like a river;
it has no straining to describe, more than there is straining in
nature to exist.  When thought is best, there is most of it.  Genius
sheds wisdom like perfume, and advertises us that it flows out of a
deeper source than the foregoing silence, that it knows so deeply and
speaks so musically, because it is itself a mutation of the thing it
describes.  It is sun and moon and wave and fire in music, as
astronomy is thought and harmony in masses of matter.

        What is all history but the work of ideas, a record of the
incomputable energy which his infinite aspirations infuse into man?
Has any thing grand and lasting been done?  Who did it?  Plainly not
any man, but all men: it was the prevalence and inundation of an
idea.  What brought the pilgrims here?  One man says, civil liberty;
another, the desire of founding a church; and a third, discovers that
the motive force was plantation and trade.  But if the Puritans could
rise from the dust, they could not answer.  It is to be seen in what
they were, and not in what they designed; it was the growth and
expansion of the human race, and resembled herein the sequent
Revolution, which was not begun in Concord, or Lexington, or
Virginia, but was the overflowing of the sense of natural right in
every clear and active spirit of the period.  Is a man boastful and
knowing, and his own master? -- we turn from him without hope: but
let him be filled with awe and dread before the Vast and the Divine,
which uses him glad to be used, and our eye is riveted to the chain
of events.  What a debt is ours to that old religion which, in the
childhood of most of us, still dwelt like a sabbath morning in the
country of New England, teaching privation, self-denial and sorrow!
A man was born not for prosperity, but to suffer for the benefit of
others, like the noble rock-maple which all around our villages
bleeds for the service of man.  Not praise, not men's acceptance of
our doing, but the spirit's holy errand through us absorbed the
thought.  How dignified was this!  How all that is called talents and
success, in our noisy capitals, becomes buzz and din before this
man-worthiness!  How our friendships and the complaisances we use,
shame us now!  Shall we not quit our companions, as if they were
thieves and pot-companions, and betake ourselves to some desert cliff
of mount Katahdin, some unvisited recess in Moosehead Lake, to bewail
our innocency and to recover it, and with it the power to communicate
again with these sharers of a more sacred idea?

        And what is to replace for us the piety of that race?  We
cannot have theirs: it glides away from us day by day, but we also
can bask in the great morning which rises forever out of the eastern
sea, and be ourselves the children of the light.  I stand here to
say, Let us worship the mighty and transcendent Soul.  It is the
office, I doubt not, of this age to annul that adulterous divorce
which the superstition of many ages has effected between the
intellect and holiness.  The lovers of goodness have been one class,
the students of wisdom another, as if either could exist in any
purity without the other.  Truth is always holy, holiness always
wise.  I will that we keep terms with sin, and a sinful literature
and society, no longer, but live a life of discovery and performance.
Accept the intellect, and it will accept us.  Be the lowly ministers
of that pure omniscience, and deny it not before men.  It will burn
up all profane literature, all base current opinions, all the false
powers of the world, as in a moment of time.  I draw from nature the
lesson of an intimate divinity.  Our health and reason as men needs
our respect to this fact, against the heedlessness and against the
contradiction of society.  The sanity of man needs the poise of this
immanent force.  His nobility needs the assurance of this
inexhaustible reserved power.  How great soever have been its
bounties, they are a drop to the sea whence they flow.  If you say,
`the acceptance of the vision is also the act of God:' -- I shall not
seek to penetrate the mystery, I admit the force of what you say.  If
you ask, `How can any rules be given for the attainment of gifts so
sublime?' I shall only remark that the solicitations of this spirit,
as long as there is life, are never forborne.  Tenderly, tenderly,
they woo and court us from every object in nature, from every fact in
life, from every thought in the mind.  The one condition coupled with
the gift of truth is its use.  That man shall be learned who reduceth
his learning to practice.  Emanuel Swedenborg affirmed that it was
opened to him, "that the spirits who knew truth in this life, but did
it not, at death shall lose their knowledge." "If knowledge," said
Ali the Caliph, "calleth unto practice, well; if not, it goeth away."
The only way into nature is to enact our best insight.  Instantly we
are higher poets, and can speak a deeper law.  Do what you know, and
perception is converted into character, as islands and continents
were built by invisible infusories, or, as these forest leaves absorb
light, electricity, and volatile gases, and the gnarled oak to live a
thousand years is the arrest and fixation of the most volatile and
ethereal currents.  The doctrine of this Supreme Presence is a cry of
joy and exultation.  Who shall dare think he has come late into
nature, or has missed anything excellent in the past, who seeth the
admirable stars of possibility, and the yet untouched continent of
hope glittering with all its mountains in the vast West?  I praise
with wonder this great reality, which seems to drown all things in
the deluge of its light.  What man seeing this, can lose it from his
thoughts, or entertain a meaner subject?  The entrance of this into
his mind seems to be the birth of man.  We cannot describe the
natural history of the soul, but we know that it is divine.  I cannot
tell if these wonderful qualities which house to-day in this mortal
frame, shall ever reassemble in equal activity in a similar frame, or
whether they have before had a natural history like that of this body
you see before you; but this one thing I know, that these qualities
did not now begin to exist, cannot be sick with my sickness, nor
buried in any grave; but that they circulate through the Universe:
before the world was, they were.  Nothing can bar them out, or shut
them in, but they penetrate the ocean and land, space and time, form
and essence, and hold the key to universal nature.  I draw from this
faith courage and hope.  All things are known to the soul.  It is not
to be surprised by any communication.  Nothing can be greater than
it.  Let those fear and those fawn who will.  The soul is in her
native realm, and it is wider than space, older than time, wide as
hope, rich as love.  Pusillanimity and fear she refuses with a
beautiful scorn: they are not for her who putteth on her coronation
robes, and goes out through universal love to universal power.

.
        Nature; Adresses, and Lectures
        by Ralph Waldo Emerson
 
 
 
        NATURE
 
        ----
 
        A subtle chain of countless rings
        The next unto the farthest brings;
        The eye reads omens where it goes,
        And speaks all languages the rose;
        And, striving to be man, the worm
        Mounts through all the spires of form.

 
 
 
        Introduction

        Our age is retrospective.  It builds the sepulchres of the
fathers.  It writes biographies, histories, and criticism.  The
foregoing generations beheld God and nature face to face; we, through
their eyes.  Why should not we also enjoy an original relation to the
universe?  Why should not we have a poetry and philosophy of insight
and not of tradition, and a religion by revelation to us, and not the
history of theirs?  Embosomed for a season in nature, whose floods of
life stream around and through us, and invite us by the powers they
supply, to action proportioned to nature, why should we grope among
the dry bones of the past, or put the living generation into
masquerade out of its faded wardrobe?  The sun shines to-day also.
There is more wool and flax in the fields.  There are new lands, new
men, new thoughts.  Let us demand our own works and laws and worship.

        Undoubtedly we have no questions to ask which are unanswerable.
We must trust the perfection of the creation so far, as to believe
that whatever curiosity the order of things has awakened in our
minds, the order of things can satisfy.  Every man's condition is a
solution in hieroglyphic to those inquiries he would put.  He acts it
as life, before he apprehends it as truth.  In like manner, nature is
already, in its forms and tendencies, describing its own design.  Let
us interrogate the great apparition, that shines so peacefully around
us.  Let us inquire, to what end is nature?

        All science has one aim, namely, to find a theory of nature.
We have theories of races and of functions, but scarcely yet a remote
approach to an idea of creation.  We are now so far from the road to
truth, that religious teachers dispute and hate each other, and
speculative men are esteemed unsound and frivolous.  But to a sound
judgment, the most abstract truth is the most practical.  Whenever a
true theory appears, it will be its own evidence.  Its test is, that
it will explain all phenomena.  Now many are thought not only
unexplained but inexplicable; as language, sleep, madness, dreams,
beasts, sex.

 
        Philosophically considered, the universe is composed of Nature
and the Soul.  Strictly speaking, therefore, all that is separate
from us, all which Philosophy distinguishes as the NOT ME, that is,
both nature and art, all other men and my own body, must be ranked
under this name, NATURE.  In enumerating the values of nature and
casting up their sum, I shall use the word in both senses; -- in its
common and in its philosophical import.  In inquiries so general as
our present one, the inaccuracy is not material; no confusion of
thought will occur.  _Nature_, in the common sense, refers to
essences unchanged by man; space, the air, the river, the leaf.
_Art_ is applied to the mixture of his will with the same things, as
in a house, a canal, a statue, a picture.  But his operations taken
together are so insignificant, a little chipping, baking, patching,
and washing, that in an impression so grand as that of the world on
the human mind, they do not vary the result.

 
 

                       _Chapter I_ NATURE

        To go into solitude, a man needs to retire as much from his
chamber as from society.  I am not solitary whilst I read and write,
though nobody is with me.  But if a man would be alone, let him look
at the stars.  The rays that come from those heavenly worlds, will
separate between him and what he touches.  One might think the
atmosphere was made transparent with this design, to give man, in the
heavenly bodies, the perpetual presence of the sublime.  Seen in the
streets of cities, how great they are!  If the stars should appear
one night in a thousand years, how would men believe and adore; and
preserve for many generations the remembrance of the city of God
which had been shown!  But every night come out these envoys of
beauty, and light the universe with their admonishing smile.

        The stars awaken a certain reverence, because though always
present, they are inaccessible; but all natural objects make a
kindred impression, when the mind is open to their influence.  Nature
never wears a mean appearance.  Neither does the wisest man extort
her secret, and lose his curiosity by finding out all her perfection.
Nature never became a toy to a wise spirit.  The flowers, the
animals, the mountains, reflected the wisdom of his best hour, as
much as they had delighted the simplicity of his childhood.

        When we speak of nature in this manner, we have a distinct but
most poetical sense in the mind.  We mean the integrity of impression
made by manifold natural objects.  It is this which distinguishes the
stick of timber of the wood-cutter, from the tree of the poet.  The
charming landscape which I saw this morning, is indubitably made up
of some twenty or thirty farms.  Miller owns this field, Locke that,
and Manning the woodland beyond.  But none of them owns the
landscape.  There is a property in the horizon which no man has but
he whose eye can integrate all the parts, that is, the poet.  This is
the best part of these men's farms, yet to this their warranty-deeds
give no title.

 
        To speak truly, few adult persons can see nature.  Most persons
do not see the sun.  At least they have a very superficial seeing.
The sun illuminates only the eye of the man, but shines into the eye
and the heart of the child.  The lover of nature is he whose inward
and outward senses are still truly adjusted to each other; who has
retained the spirit of infancy even into the era of manhood.  His
intercourse with heaven and earth, becomes part of his daily food.
In the presence of nature, a wild delight runs through the man, in
spite of real sorrows.  Nature says, -- he is my creature, and maugre
all his impertinent griefs, he shall be glad with me.  Not the sun or
the summer alone, but every hour and season yields its tribute of
delight; for every hour and change corresponds to and authorizes a
different state of the mind, from breathless noon to grimmest
midnight.  Nature is a setting that fits equally well a comic or a
mourning piece.  In good health, the air is a cordial of incredible
virtue.  Crossing a bare common, in snow puddles, at twilight, under
a clouded sky, without having in my thoughts any occurrence of
special good fortune, I have enjoyed a perfect exhilaration.  I am
glad to the brink of fear.  In the woods too, a man casts off his
years, as the snake his slough, and at what period soever of life, is
always a child.  In the woods, is perpetual youth.  Within these
plantations of God, a decorum and sanctity reign, a perennial
festival is dressed, and the guest sees not how he should tire of
them in a thousand years.  In the woods, we return to reason and
faith.  There I feel that nothing can befall me in life, -- no
disgrace, no calamity, (leaving me my eyes,) which nature cannot
repair.  Standing on the bare ground, -- my head bathed by the blithe
air, and uplifted into infinite space, -- all mean egotism vanishes.
I become a transparent eye-ball; I am nothing; I see all; the
currents of the Universal Being circulate through me; I am part or
particle of God.  The name of the nearest friend sounds then foreign
and accidental: to be brothers, to be acquaintances, -- master or
servant, is then a trifle and a disturbance.  I am the lover of
uncontained and immortal beauty.  In the wilderness, I find something
more dear and connate than in streets or villages.  In the tranquil
landscape, and especially in the distant line of the horizon, man
beholds somewhat as beautiful as his own nature.

 
        The greatest delight which the fields and woods minister, is
the suggestion of an occult relation between man and the vegetable.
I am not alone and unacknowledged.  They nod to me, and I to them.
The waving of the boughs in the storm, is new to me and old.  It
takes me by surprise, and yet is not unknown.  Its effect is like
that of a higher thought or a better emotion coming over me, when I
deemed I was thinking justly or doing right.

        Yet it is certain that the power to produce this delight, does
not reside in nature, but in man, or in a harmony of both.  It is
necessary to use these pleasures with great temperance.  For, nature
is not always tricked in holiday attire, but the same scene which
yesterday breathed perfume and glittered as for the frolic of the
nymphs, is overspread with melancholy today.  Nature always wears the
colors of the spirit.  To a man laboring under calamity, the heat of
his own fire hath sadness in it.  Then, there is a kind of contempt
of the landscape felt by him who has just lost by death a dear
friend.  The sky is less grand as it shuts down over less worth in
the population.

 
 

                       _Chapter II_ COMMODITY

        Whoever considers the final cause of the world, will discern a
multitude of usesthat result.  They all admit of being thrown into
one of the following classes; Commodity; Beauty; Language; and
Discipline.

        Under the general name of Commodity, I rank all those
advantages which our senses owe to nature.  This, of course, is a
benefit which is temporary and mediate, not ultimate, like its
service to the soul.  Yet although low, it is perfect in its kind,
and is the only use of nature which all men apprehend.  The misery of
man appears like childish petulance, when we explore the steady and
prodigal provision that has been made for his support and delight on
this green ball which floats him through the heavens.  What angels
invented these splendid ornaments, these rich conveniences, this
ocean of air above, this ocean of water beneath, this firmament of
earth between? this zodiac of lights, this tent of dropping clouds,
this striped coat of climates, this fourfold year?  Beasts, fire,
water, stones, and corn serve him.  The field is at once his floor,
his work-yard, his play-ground, his garden, and his bed.

        "More servants wait on man
        Than he 'll take notice of." ------

        Nature, in its ministry to man, is not only the material, but
is also the process and the result.  All the parts incessantly work
into each other's hands for the profit of man.  The wind sows the
seed; the sun evaporates the sea; the wind blows the vapor to the
field; the ice, on the other side of the planet, condenses rain on
this; the rain feeds the plant; the plant feeds the animal; and thus
the endless circulations of the divine charity nourish man.

        The useful arts are reproductions or new combinations by the
wit of man, of the same natural benefactors.  He no longer waits for
favoring gales, but by means of steam, he realizes the fable of
Aeolus's bag, and carries the two and thirty winds in the boiler of
his boat.  To diminish friction, he paves the road with iron bars,
and, mounting a coach with a ship-load of men, animals, and
merchandise behind him, he darts through the country, from town to
town, like an eagle or a swallow through the air.  By the aggregate
of these aids, how is the face of the world changed, from the era of
Noah to that of Napoleon!  The private poor man hath cities, ships,
canals, bridges, built for him.  He goes to the post-office, and the
human race run on his errands; to the book-shop, and the human race
read and write of all that happens, for him; to the court-house, and
nations repair his wrongs.  He sets his house upon the road, and the
human race go forth every morning, and shovel out the snow, and cut a
path for him.

        But there is no need of specifying particulars in this class of
uses.  The catalogue is endless, and the examples so obvious, that I
shall leave them to the reader's reflection, with the general remark,
that this mercenary benefit is one which has respect to a farther
good.  A man is fed, not that he may be fed, but that he may work.

 
 

                       _Chapter III_ BEAUTY

        A nobler want of man is served by nature, namely, the love of
Beauty.

        The ancient Greeks called the world {kosmos}, beauty.  Such is
the constitution of all things, or such the plastic power of the
human eye, that the primary forms, as the sky, the mountain, the
tree, the animal, give us a delight _in and for themselves_; a
pleasure arising from outline, color, motion, and grouping.  This
seems partly owing to the eye itself.  The eye is the best of
artists.  By the mutual action of its structure and of the laws of
light, perspective is produced, which integrates every mass of
objects, of what character soever, into a well colored and shaded
globe, so that where the particular objects are mean and unaffecting,
the landscape which they compose, is round and symmetrical.  And as
the eye is the best composer, so light is the first of painters.
There is no object so foul that intense light will not make
beautiful.  And the stimulus it affords to the sense, and a sort of
infinitude which it hath, like space and time, make all matter gay.
Even the corpse has its own beauty.  But besides this general grace
diffused over nature, almost all the individual forms are agreeable
to the eye, as is proved by our endless imitations of some of them,
as the acorn, the grape, the pine-cone, the wheat-ear, the egg, the
wings and forms of most birds, the lion's claw, the serpent, the
butterfly, sea-shells, flames, clouds, buds, leaves, and the forms of
many trees, as the palm.

        For better consideration, we may distribute the aspects of
Beauty in a threefold manner.

        1. First, the simple perception of natural forms is a delight.
The influence of the forms and actions in nature, is so needful to
man, that, in its lowest functions, it seems to lie on the confines
of commodity and beauty.  To the body and mind which have been
cramped by noxious work or company, nature is medicinal and restores
their tone.  The tradesman, the attorney comes out of the din and
craft of the street, and sees the sky and the woods, and is a man
again.  In their eternal calm, he finds himself.  The health of the
eye seems to demand a horizon.  We are never tired, so long as we can
see far enough.

        But in other hours, Nature satisfies by its loveliness, and
without any mixture of corporeal benefit.  I see the spectacle of
morning from the hill-top over against my house, from day-break to
sun-rise, with emotions which an angel might share.  The long slender
bars of cloud float like fishes in the sea of crimson light.  From
the earth, as a shore, I look out into that silent sea.  I seem to
partake its rapid transformations: the active enchantment reaches my
dust, and I dilate and conspire with the morning wind.  How does
Nature deify us with a few and cheap elements!  Give me health and a
day, and I will make the pomp of emperors ridiculous.  The dawn is my
Assyria; the sun-set and moon-rise my Paphos, and unimaginable realms
of faerie; broad noon shall be my England of the senses and the
understanding; the night shall be my Germany of mystic philosophy and
dreams.

        Not less excellent, except for our less susceptibility in the
afternoon, was the charm, last evening, of a January sunset.  The
western clouds divided and subdivided themselves into pink flakes
modulated with tints of unspeakable softness; and the air had so much
life and sweetness, that it was a pain to come within doors.  What
was it that nature would say?  Was there no meaning in the live
repose of the valley behind the mill, and which Homer or Shakspeare
could not reform for me in words?  The leafless trees become spires
of flame in the sunset, with the blue east for their back-ground, and
the stars of the dead calices of flowers, and every withered stem and
stubble rimed with frost, contribute something to the mute music.

        The inhabitants of cities suppose that the country landscape is
pleasant only half the year.  I please myself with the graces of the
winter scenery, and believe that we are as much touched by it as by
the genial influences of summer.  To the attentive eye, each moment
of the year has its own beauty, and in the same field, it beholds,
every hour, a picture which was never seen before, and which shall
never be seen again.  The heavens change every moment, and reflect
their glory or gloom on the plains beneath.  The state of the crop in
the surrounding farms alters the expression of the earth from week to
week.  The succession of native plants in the pastures and roadsides,
which makes the silent clock by which time tells the summer hours,
will make even the divisions of the day sensible to a keen observer.
The tribes of birds and insects, like the plants punctual to their
time, follow each other, and the year has room for all.  By
water-courses, the variety is greater.  In July, the blue pontederia
or pickerel-weed blooms in large beds in the shallow parts of our
pleasant river, and swarms with yellow butterflies in continual
motion.  Art cannot rival this pomp of purple and gold.  Indeed the
river is a perpetual gala, and boasts each month a new ornament.

        But this beauty of Nature which is seen and felt as beauty, is
the least part.  The shows of day, the dewy morning, the rainbow,
mountains, orchards in blossom, stars, moonlight, shadows in still
water, and the like, if too eagerly hunted, become shows merely, and
mock us with their unreality.  Go out of the house to see the moon,
and 't is mere tinsel; it will not please as when its light shines
upon your necessary journey.  The beauty that shimmers in the yellow
afternoons of October, who ever could clutch it?  Go forth to find
it, and it is gone: 't is only a mirage as you look from the windows
of diligence.

        2. The presence of a higher, namely, of the spiritual element
is essential to its perfection.  The high and divine beauty which can
be loved without effeminacy, is that which is found in combination
with the human will.  Beauty is the mark God sets upon virtue.  Every
natural action is graceful.  Every heroic act is also decent, and
causes the place and the bystanders to shine.  We are taught by great
actions that the universe is the property of every individual in it.
Every rational creature has all nature for his dowry and estate.  It
is his, if he will.  He may divest himself of it; he may creep into a
corner, and abdicate his kingdom, as most men do, but he is entitled
to the world by his constitution.  In proportion to the energy of his
thought and will, he takes up the world into himself.  "All those
things for which men plough, build, or sail, obey virtue;" said
Sallust.  "The winds and waves," said Gibbon, "are always on the side
of the ablest navigators." So are the sun and moon and all the stars
of heaven.  When a noble act is done, -- perchance in a scene of
great natural beauty; when Leonidas and his three hundred martyrs
consume one day in dying, and the sun and moon come each and look at
them once in the steep defile of Thermopylae; when Arnold Winkelried,
in the high Alps, under the shadow of the avalanche, gathers in his
side a sheaf of Austrian spears to break the line for his comrades;
are not these heroes entitled to add the beauty of the scene to the
beauty of the deed?  When the bark of Columbus nears the shore of
America; -- before it, the beach lined with savages, fleeing out of
all their huts of cane; the sea behind; and the purple mountains of
the Indian Archipelago around, can we separate the man from the
living picture?  Does not the New World clothe his form with her
palm-groves and savannahs as fit drapery?  Ever does natural beauty
steal in like air, and envelope great actions.  When Sir Harry Vane
was dragged up the Tower-hill, sitting on a sled, to suffer death, as
the champion of the English laws, one of the multitude cried out to
him, "You never sate on so glorious a seat." Charles II., to
intimidate the citizens of London, caused the patriot Lord Russel to
be drawn in an open coach, through the principal streets of the city,
on his way to the scaffold.  "But," his biographer says, "the
multitude imagined they saw liberty and virtue sitting by his side."
In private places, among sordid objects, an act of truth or heroism
seems at once to draw to itself the sky as its temple, the sun as its
candle.  Nature stretcheth out her arms to embrace man, only let his
thoughts be of equal greatness.  Willingly does she follow his steps
with the rose and the violet, and bend her lines of grandeur and
grace to the decoration of her darling child.  Only let his thoughts
be of equal scope, and the frame will suit the picture.  A virtuous
man is in unison with her works, and makes the central figure of the
visible sphere.  Homer, Pindar, Socrates, Phocion, associate
themselves fitly in our memory with the geography and climate of
Greece.  The visible heavens and earth sympathize with Jesus.  And in
common life, whosoever has seen a person of powerful character and
happy genius, will have remarked how easily he took all things along
with him, -- the persons, the opinions, and the day, and nature
became ancillary to a man.

        3. There is still another aspect under which the beauty of the
world may be viewed, namely, as it become s an object of the
intellect.  Beside the relation of things to virtue, they have a
relation to thought.  The intellect searches out the absolute order
of things as they stand in the mind of God, and without the colors of
affection.  The intellectual and the active powers seem to succeed
each other, and the exclusive activity of the one, generates the
exclusive activity of the other.  There is something unfriendly in
each to the other, but they are like the alternate periods of feeding
and working in animals; each prepares and will be followed by the
other.  Therefore does beauty, which, in relation to actions, as we
have seen, comes unsought, and comes because it is unsought, remain
for the apprehension and pursuit of the intellect; and then again, in
its turn, of the active power.  Nothing divine dies.  All good is
eternally reproductive.  The beauty of nature reforms itself in the
mind, and not for barren contemplation, but for new creation.

        All men are in some degree impressed by the face of the world;
some men even to delight.  This love of beauty is Taste.  Others have
the same love in such excess, that, not content with admiring, they
seek to embody it in new forms.  The creation of beauty is Art.

        The production of a work of art throws a light upon the mystery
of humanity.  A work of art is an abstract or epitome of the world.
It is the result or expression of nature, in miniature.  For,
although the works of nature are innumerable and all different, the
result or the expression of them all is similar and single.  Nature
is a sea of forms radically alike and even unique.  A leaf, a
sun-beam, a landscape, the ocean, make an analogous impression on the
mind.  What is common to them all, -- that perfectness and harmony,
is beauty.  The standard of beauty is the entire circuit of natural
forms, -- the totality of nature; which the Italians expressed by
defining beauty "il piu nell' uno." Nothing is quite beautiful alone:
nothing but is beautiful in the whole.  A single object is only so
far beautiful as it suggests this universal grace.  The poet, the
painter, the sculptor, the musician, the architect, seek each to
concentrate this radiance of the world on one point, and each in his
several work to satisfy the love of beauty which stimulates him to
produce.  Thus is Art, a nature passed through the alembic of man.
Thus in art, does nature work through the will of a man filled with
the beauty of her first works.

        The world thus exists to the soul to satisfy the desire of
beauty.  This element I call an ultimate end.  No reason can be asked
or given why the soul seeks beauty.  Beauty, in its largest and
profoundest sense, is one expression for the universe.  God is the
all-fair.  Truth, and goodness, and beauty, are but different faces
of the same All.  But beauty in nature is not ultimate.  It is the
herald of inward and eternal beauty, and is not alone a solid and
satisfactory good.  It must stand as a part, and not as yet the last
or highest expression of the final cause of Nature.

 
 

                       _Chapter IV_ LANGUAGE

        Language is a third use which Nature subserves to man.  Nature
is the vehble, and threefold degree.

        1. Words are signs of natural facts.

        2. Particular natural facts are symbols of particular spiritual
facts.

        3. Nature is the symbol of spirit.

        1. Words are signs of natural facts.  The use of natural
history is to give us aid in supernatural history: the use of the
outer creation, to give us language for the beings and changes of the
inward creation.  Every word which is used to express a moral or
intellectual fact, if traced to its root, is found to be borrowed
from some material appearance.  _Right_ means _straight_; _wrong_
means _twisted_.  _Spirit_ primarily means _wind_; _transgression_,
the crossing of a _line_; _supercilious_, the _raising of the
eyebrow_.  We say the _heart_ to express emotion, the _head_ to
denote thought; and _thought_ and _emotion_ are words borrowed from
sensible things, and now appropriated to spiritual nature.  Most of
the process by which this transformation is made, is hidden from us
in the remote time when language was framed; but the same tendency
may be daily observed in children.  Children and savages use only
nouns or names of things, which they convert into verbs, and apply to
analogous mental acts.

        2. But this origin of all words that convey a spiritual import,
-- so conspicuous a fact in the history of language, -- is our least
debt to nature.  It is not words only that are emblematic; it is
things which are emblematic.  Every natural fact is a symbol of some
spiritual fact.  Every appearance in nature corresponds to some state
of the mind, and that state of the mind can only be described by
presenting that natural appearance as its picture.  An enraged man is
a lion, a cunning man is a fox, a firm man is a rock, a learned man
is a torch.  A lamb is innocence; a snake is subtle spite; flowers
express to us the delicate affections.  Light and darkness are our
familiar expression for knowledge and ignorance; and heat for love.
Visible distance behind and before us, is respectively our image of
memory and hope.

        Who looks upon a river in a meditative hour, and is not
reminded of the flux of all things?  Throw a stone into the stream,
and the circles that propagate themselves are the beautiful type of
all influence.  Man is conscious of a universal soul within or behind
his individual life, wherein, as in a firmament, the natures of
Justice, Truth, Love, Freedom, arise and shine.  This universal soul,
he calls Reason: it is not mine, or thine, or his, but we are its; we
are its property and men.  And the blue sky in which the private
earth is buried, the sky with its eternal calm, and full of
everlasting orbs, is the type of Reason.  That which, intellectually
considered, we call Reason, considered in relation to nature, we call
Spirit.  Spirit is the Creator.  Spirit hath life in itself.  And man
in all ages and countries, embodies it in his language, as the
FATHER.

        It is easily seen that there is nothing lucky or capricious in
these analogies, but that they are constant, and pervade nature.
These are not the dreams of a few poets, here and there, but man is
an analogist, and studies relations in all objects.  He is placed in
the centre of beings, and a ray of relation passes from every other
being to him.  And neither can man be understood without these
objects, nor these objects without man.  All the facts in natural
history taken by themselves, have no value, but are barren, like a
single sex.  But marry it to human history, and it is full of life.
Whole Floras, all Linnaeus' and Buffon's volumes, are dry catalogues
of facts; but the most trivial of these facts, the habit of a plant,
the organs, or work, or noise of an insect, applied to the
illustration of a fact in intellectual philosophy, or, in any way
associated to human nature, affects us in the most lively and
agreeable manner.  The seed of a plant, -- to what affecting
analogies in the nature of man, is that little fruit made use of, in
all discourse, up to the voice of Paul, who calls the human corpse a
seed, -- "It is sown a natural body; it is raised a spiritual body."
The motion of the earth round its axis, and round the sun, makes the
day, and the year.  These are certain amounts of brute light and
heat.  But is there no intent of an analogy between man's life and
the seasons?  And do the seasons gain no grandeur or pathos from that
analogy?  The instincts of the ant are very unimportant, considered
as the ant's; but the moment a ray of relation is seen to extend from
it to man, and the little drudge is seen to be a monitor, a little
body with a mighty heart, then all its habits, even that said to be
recently observed, that it never sleeps, become sublime.

        Because of this radical correspondence between visible things
and human thoughts, savages, who have only what is necessary,
converse in figures.  As we go back in history, language becomes more
picturesque, until its infancy, when it is all poetry; or all
spiritual facts are represented by natural symbols.  The same symbols
are found to make the original elements of all languages.  It has
moreover been observed, that the idioms of all languages approach
each other in passages of the greatest eloquence and power.  And as
this is the first language, so is it the last.  This immediate
dependence of language upon nature, this conversion of an outward
phenomenon into a type of somewhat in human life, never loses its
power to affect us.  It is this which gives that piquancy to the
conversation of a strong-natured farmer or back-woodsman, which all
men relish.

        A man's power to connect his thought with its proper symbol,
and so to utter it, depends on the simplicity of his character, that
is, upon his love of truth, and his desire to communicate it without
loss.  The corruption of man is followed by the corruption of
language.  When simplicity of character and the sovereignty of ideas
is broken up by the prevalence of secondary desires, the desire of
riches, of pleasure, of power, and of praise, -- and duplicity and
falsehood take place of simplicity and truth, the power over nature
as an interpreter of the will, is in a degree lost; new imagery
ceases to be created, and old words are perverted to stand for things
which are not; a paper currency is employed, when there is no bullion
in the vaults.  In due time, the fraud is manifest, and words lose
all power to stimulate the understanding or the affections.  Hundreds
of writers may be found in every long-civilized nation, who for a
short time believe, and make others believe, that they see and utter
truths, who do not of themselves clothe one thought in its natural
garment, but who feed unconsciously on the language created by the
primary writers of the country, those, namely, who hold primarily on
nature.

        But wise men pierce this rotten diction and fasten words again
to visible things; so that picturesque language is at once a
commanding certificate that he who employs it, is a man in alliance
with truth and God.  The moment our discourse rises above the ground
line of familiar facts, and is inflamed with passion or exalted by
thought, it clothes itself in images.  A man conversing in earnest,
if he watch his intellectual processes, will find that a material
image, more or less luminous, arises in his mind, cotemporaneous with
every thought, which furnishes the vestment of the thought.  Hence,
good writing and brilliant discourse are perpetual allegories.  This
imagery is spontaneous.  It is the blending of experience with the
present action of the mind.  It is proper creation.  It is the
working of the Original Cause through the instruments he has already
made.

        These facts may suggest the advantage which the country-life
possesses for a powerful mind, over the artificial and curtailed life
of cities.  We know more from nature than we can at will communicate.
Its light flows into the mind evermore, and we forget its presence.
The poet, the orator, bred in the woods, whose senses have been
nourished by their fair and appeasing changes, year after year,
without design and without heed, -- shall not lose their lesson
altogether, in the roar of cities or the broil of politics.  Long
hereafter, amidst agitation and terror in national councils, -- in
the hour of revolution, -- these solemn images shall reappear in
their morning lustre, as fit symbols and words of the thoughts which
the passing events shall awaken.  At the call of a noble sentiment,
again the woods wave, the pines murmur, the river rolls and shines,
and the cattle low upon the mountains, as he saw and heard them in
his infancy.  And with these forms, the spells of persuasion, the
keys of power are put into his hands.

        3. We are thus assisted by natural objects in the expression of
particular meanings.  But how great a language to convey such
pepper-corn informations!  Did it need such noble races of creatures,
this profusion of forms, this host of orbs in heaven, to furnish man
with the dictionary and grammar of his municipal speech?  Whilst we
use this grand cipher to expedite the affairs of our pot and kettle,
we feel that we have not yet put it to its use, neither are able.  We
are like travellers using the cinders of a volcano to roast their
eggs.  Whilst we see that it always stands ready to clothe what we
would say, we cannot avoid the question, whether the characters are
not significant of themselves.  Have mountains, and waves, and skies,
no significance but what we consciously give them, when we employ
them as emblems of our thoughts?  The world is emblematic.  Parts of
speech are metaphors, because the whole of nature is a metaphor of
the human mind.  The laws of moral nature answer to those of matter
as face to face in a glass.  "The visible world and the relation of
its parts, is the dial plate of the invisible." The axioms of physics
translate the laws of ethics.  Thus, "the whole is greater than its
part;" "reaction is equal to action;" "the smallest weight may be
made to lift the greatest, the difference of weight being compensated
by time;" and many the like propositions, which have an ethical as
well as physical sense.  These propositions have a much more
extensive and universal sense when applied to human life, than when
confined to technical use.

        In like manner, the memorable words of history, and the
proverbs of nations, consist usually of a natural fact, selected as a
picture or parable of a moral truth.  Thus; A rolling stone gathers
no moss; A bird in the hand is worth two in the bush; A cripple in
the right way, will beat a racer in the wrong; Make hay while the sun
shines; 'T is hard to carry a full cup even; Vinegar is the son of
wine; The last ounce broke the camel's back; Long-lived trees make
roots first; -- and the like.  In their primary sense these are
trivial facts, but we repeat them for the value of their analogical
import.  What is true of proverbs, is true of all fables, parables,
and allegories.

        This relation between the mind and matter is not fancied by
some poet, but stands in the will of God, and so is free to be known
by all men.  It appears to men, or it does not appear.  When in
fortunate hours we ponder this miracle, the wise man doubts, if, at
all other times, he is not blind and deaf;

        ------ "Can these things be,
        And overcome us like a summer's cloud,
        Without our special wonder?"

        for the universe becomes transparent, and the light of higher
laws than its own, shines through it.  It is the standing problem
which has exercised the wonder and the study of every fine genius
since the world began; from the era of the Egyptians and the
Brahmins, to that of Pythagoras, of Plato, of Bacon, of Leibnitz, of
Swedenborg.  There sits the Sphinx at the road-side, and from age to
age, as each prophet comes by, he tries his fortune at reading her
riddle.  There seems to be a necessity in spirit to manifest itself
in material forms; and day and night, river and storm, beast and
bird, acid and alkali, preexist in necessary Ideas in the mind of
God, and are what they are by virtue of preceding affections, in the
world of spirit.  A Fact is the end or last issue of spirit.  The
visible creation is the terminus or the circumference of the
invisible world.  "Material objects," said a French philosopher, "are
necessarily kinds of _scoriae_ of the substantial thoughts of the
Creator, which must always preserve an exact relation to their first
origin; in other words, visible nature must have a spiritual and
moral side."

        This doctrine is abstruse, and though the images of "garment,"
"scoriae," "mirror," &c., may stimulate the fancy, we must summon the
aid of subtler and more vital expositors to make it plain.  "Every
scripture is to be interpreted by the same spirit which gave it
forth," -- is the fundamental law of criticism.  A life in harmony
with nature, the love of truth and of virtue, will purge the eyes to
understand her text.  By degrees we may come to know the primitive
sense of the permanent objects of nature, so that the world shall be
to us an open book, and every form significant of its hidden life and
final cause.

        A new interest surprises us, whilst, under the view now
suggested, we contemplate the fearful extent and multitude of
objects; since "every object rightly seen, unlocks a new faculty of
the soul." That which was unconscious truth, becomes, when
interpreted and defined in an object, a part of the domain of
knowledge, -- a new weapon in the magazine of power.

 
 

                       _Chapter V_ DISCIPLINE

        In view of the significance of nature, we arrive at once at a
new This use of the world includes the preceding uses, as parts of
itself.

        Space, time, society, labor, climate, food, locomotion, the
animals, the mechanical forces, give us sincerest lessons, day by
day, whose meaning is unlimited.  They educate both the Understanding
and the Reason.  Every property of matter is a school for the
understanding, -- its solidity or resistance, its inertia, its
extension, its figure, its divisibility.  The understanding adds,
divides, combines, measures, and finds nutriment and room for its
activity in this worthy scene.  Meantime, Reason transfers all these
lessons into its own world of thought, by perceiving the analogy that
marries Matter and Mind.

        1. Nature is a discipline of the understanding in intellectual
truths.  Our dealing with sensible objects is a constant exercise in
the necessary lessons of difference, of likeness, of order, of being
and seeming, of progressive arrangement; of ascent from particular to
general; of combination to one end of manifold forces.  Proportioned
to the importance of the organ to be formed, is the extreme care with
which its tuition is provided, -- a care pretermitted in no single
case.  What tedious training, day after day, year after year, never
ending, to form the common sense; what continual reproduction of
annoyances, inconveniences, dilemmas; what rejoicing over us of
little men; what disputing of prices, what reckonings of interest, --
and all to form the Hand of the mind; -- to instruct us that "good
thoughts are no better than good dreams, unless they be executed!"

        The same good office is performed by Property and its filial
systems of debt and credit.  Debt, grinding debt, whose iron face the
widow, the orphan, and the sons of genius fear and hate; -- debt,
which consumes so much time, which so cripples and disheartens a
great spirit with cares that seem so base, is a preceptor whose
lessons cannot be forgone, and is needed most by those who suffer
from it most.  Moreover, property, which has been well compared to
snow, -- "if it fall level to-day, it will be blown into drifts
to-morrow," -- is the surface action of internal machinery, like the
index on the face of a clock.  Whilst now it is the gymnastics of the
understanding, it is hiving in the foresight of the spirit,
experience in profounder laws.

        The whole character and fortune of the individual are affected
by the least inequalities in the culture of the understanding; for
example, in the perception of differences.  Therefore is Space, and
therefore Time, that man may know that things are not huddled and
lumped, but sundered and individual.  A bell and a plough have each
their use, and neither can do the office of the other.  Water is good
to drink, coal to burn, wool to wear; but wool cannot be drunk, nor
water spun, nor coal eaten.  The wise man shows his wisdom in
separation, in gradation, and his scale of creatures and of merits is
as wide as nature.  The foolish have no range in their scale, but
suppose every man is as every other man.  What is not good they call
the worst, and what is not hateful, they call the best.

        In like manner, what good heed, nature forms in us!  She
pardons no mistakes.  Her yea is yea, and her nay, nay.

        The first steps in Agriculture, Astronomy, Zoology, (those
first steps which the farmer, the hunter, and the sailor take,) teach
that nature's dice are always loaded; that in her heaps and rubbish
are concealed sure and useful results.

        How calmly and genially the mind apprehends one after another
the laws of physics!  What noble emotions dilate the mortal as he
enters into the counsels of the creation, and feels by knowledge the
privilege to BE!  His insight refines him.  The beauty of nature
shines in his own breast.  Man is greater that he can see this, and
the universe less, because Time and Space relations vanish as laws
are known.

        Here again we are impressed and even daunted by the immense
Universe to be explored.  "What we know, is a point to what we do not
know." Open any recent journal of science, and weigh the problems
suggested concerning Light, Heat, Electricity, Magnetism, Physiology,
Geology, and judge whether the interest of natural science is likely
to be soon exhausted.

        Passing by many particulars of the discipline of nature, we
must not omit to specify two.

        The exercise of the Will or the lesson of power is taught in
every event.  From the child's successive possession of his several
senses up to the hour when he saith, "Thy will be done!" he is
learning the secret, that he can reduce under his will, not only
particular events, but great classes, nay the whole series of events,
and so conform all facts to his character.  Nature is thoroughly
mediate.  It is made to serve.  It receives the dominion of man as
meekly as the ass on which the Saviour rode.  It offers all its
kingdoms to man as the raw material which he may mould into what is
useful.  Man is never weary of working it up.  He forges the subtile
and delicate air into wise and melodious words, and gives them wing
as angels of persuasion and command.  One after another, his
victorious thought comes up with and reduces all things, until the
world becomes, at last, only a realized will, -- the double of the
man.

        2. Sensible objects conform to the premonitions of Reason and
reflect the conscience.  All things are moral; and in their boundless
changes have an unceasing reference to spiritual nature.  Therefore
is nature glorious with form, color, and motion, that every globe in
the remotest heaven; every chemical change from the rudest crystal up
to the laws of life; every change of vegetation from the first
principle of growth in the eye of a leaf, to the tropical forest and
antediluvian coal-mine; every animal function from the sponge up to
Hercules, shall hint or thunder to man the laws of right and wrong,
and echo the Ten Commandments.  Therefore is nature ever the ally of
Religion: lends all her pomp and riches to the religious sentiment.
Prophet and priest, David, Isaiah, Jesus, have drawn deeply from this
source.  This ethical character so penetrates the bone and marrow of
nature, as to seem the end for which it was made.  Whatever private
purpose is answered by any member or part, this is its public and
universal function, and is never omitted.  Nothing in nature is
exhausted in its first use.  When a thing has served an end to the
uttermost, it is wholly new for an ulterior service.  In God, every
end is converted into a new means.  Thus the use of commodity,
regarded by itself, is mean and squalid.  But it is to the mind an
education in the doctrine of Use, namely, that a thing is good only
so far as it serves; that a conspiring of parts and efforts to the
production of an end, is essential to any being.  The first and gross
manifestation of this truth, is our inevitable and hated training in
values and wants, in corn and meat.

        It has already been illustrated, that every natural process is
a version of a moral sentence.  The moral law lies at the centre of
nature and radiates to the circumference.  It is the pith and marrow
of every substance, every relation, and every process.  All things
with which we deal, preach to us.  What is a farm but a mute gospel?
The chaff and the wheat, weeds and plants, blight, rain, insects,
sun, -- it is a sacred emblem from the first furrow of spring to the
last stack which the snow of winter overtakes in the fields.  But the
sailor, the shepherd, the miner, the merchant, in their several
resorts, have each an experience precisely parallel, and leading to
the same conclusion: because all organizations are radically alike.
Nor can it be doubted that this moral sentiment which thus scents the
air, grows in the grain, and impregnates the waters of the world, is
caught by man and sinks into his soul.  The moral influence of nature
upon every individual is that amount of truth which it illustrates to
him.  Who can estimate this?  Who can guess how much firmness the
sea-beaten rock has taught the fisherman? how much tranquillity has
been reflected to man from the azure sky, over whose unspotted deeps
the winds forevermore drive flocks of stormy clouds, and leave no
wrinkle or stain? how much industry and providence and affection we
have caught from the pantomime of brutes?  What a searching preacher
of self-command is the varying phenomenon of Health!

        Herein is especially apprehended the unity of Nature, -- the
unity in variety, -- which meets us everywhere.  All the endless
variety of things make an identical impression.  Xenophanes
complained in his old age, that, look where he would, all things
hastened back to Unity.  He was weary of seeing the same entity in
the tedious variety of forms.  The fable of Proteus has a cordial
truth.  A leaf, a drop, a crystal, a moment of time is related to the
whole, and partakes of the perfection of the whole.  Each particle is
a microcosm, and faithfully renders the likeness of the world.

        Not only resemblances exist in things whose analogy is obvious,
as when we detect the type of the human hand in the flipper of the
fossil saurus, but also in objects wherein there is great superficial
unlikeness.  Thus architecture is called "frozen music," by De Stael
and Goethe.  Vitruvius thought an architect should be a musician.  "A
Gothic church," said Coleridge, "is a petrified religion." Michael
Angelo maintained, that, to an architect, a knowledge of anatomy is
essential.  In Haydn's oratorios, the notes present to the
imagination not only motions, as, of the snake, the stag, and the
elephant, but colors also; as the green grass.  The law of harmonic
sounds reappears in the harmonic colors.  The granite is differenced
in its laws only by the more or less of heat, from the river that
wears it away.  The river, as it flows, resembles the air that flows
over it; the air resembles the light which traverses it with more
subtile currents; the light resembles the heat which rides with it
through Space.  Each creature is only a modification of the other;
the likeness in them is more than the difference, and their radical
law is one and the same.  A rule of one art, or a law of one
organization, holds true throughout nature.  So intimate is this
Unity, that, it is easily seen, it lies under the undermost garment
of nature, and betrays its source in Universal Spirit.  For, it
pervades Thought also.  Every universal truth which we express in
words, implies or supposes every other truth.  _Omne verum vero
consonat_.  It is like a great circle on a sphere, comprising all
possible circles; which, however, may be drawn, and comprise it, in
like manner.  Every such truth is the absolute Ens seen from one
side.  But it has innumerable sides.

        The central Unity is still more conspicuous in actions.  Words
are finite organs of the infinite mind.  They cannot cover the
dimensions of what is in truth.  They break, chop, and impoverish it.
An action is the perfection and publication of thought.  A right
action seems to fill the eye, and to be related to all nature.  "The
wise man, in doing one thing, does all; or, in the one thing he does
rightly, he sees the likeness of all which is done rightly."

        Words and actions are not the attributes of brute nature.  They
introduce us to the human form, of which all other organizations
appear to be degradations.  When this appears among so many that
surround it, the spirit prefers it to all others.  It says, `From
such as this, have I drawn joy and knowledge; in such as this, have I
found and beheld myself; I will speak to it; it can speak again; it
can yield me thought already formed and alive.' In fact, the eye, --
the mind, -- is always accompanied by these forms, male and female;
and these are incomparably the richest informations of the power and
order that lie at the heart of things.  Unfortunately, every one of
them bears the marks as of some injury; is marred and superficially
defective.  Nevertheless, far different from the deaf and dumb nature
around them, these all rest like fountain-pipes on the unfathomed sea
of thought and virtue whereto they alone, of all organizations, are
the entrances.

        It were a pleasant inquiry to follow into detail their ministry
to our education, but where would it stop?  We are associated in
adolescent and adult life with some friends, who, like skies and
waters, are coextensive with our idea; who, answering each to a
certain affection of the soul, satisfy our desire on that side; whom
we lack power to put at such focal distance from us, that we can mend
or even analyze them.  We cannot choose but love them.  When much
intercourse with a friend has supplied us with a standard of
excellence, and has increased our respect for the resources of God
who thus sends a real person to outgo our ideal; when he has,
moreover, become an object of thought, and, whilst his character
retains all its unconscious effect, is converted in the mind into
solid and sweet wisdom, -- it is a sign to us that his office is
closing, and he is commonly withdrawn from our sight in a short time.

 
 

                       _Chapter VI_ IDEALISM

        Thus is the unspeakable but intelligible and practicable
meaning of the world conveyed to man, the immortal pupil, in every
object of sense.  To this one end of Discipline, all parts of nature
conspire.

        A noble doubt perpetually suggests itself, whether this end be
not the Final Cause of the Universe; and whether nature outwardly
exists.  It is a sufficient account of that Appearance we call the
World, that God will teach a human mind, and so makes it the receiver
of a certain number of congruent sensations, which we call sun and
moon, man and woman, house and trade.  In my utter impotence to test
the authenticity of the report of my senses, to know whether the
impressions they make on me correspond with outlying objects, what
difference does it make, whether Orion is up there in heaven, or some
god paints the image in the firmament of the soul?  The relations of
parts and the end of the whole remaining the same, what is the
difference, whether land and sea interact, and worlds revolve and
intermingle without number or end, -- deep yawning under deep, and
galaxy balancing galaxy, throughout absolute space, -- or, whether,
without relations of time and space, the same appearances are
inscribed in the constant faith of man?  Whether nature enjoy a
substantial existence without, or is only in the apocalypse of the
mind, it is alike useful and alike venerable to me.  Be it what it
may, it is ideal to me, so long as I cannot try the accuracy of my
senses.

        The frivolous make themselves merry with the Ideal theory, as
if its consequences were burlesque; as if it affected the stability
of nature.  It surely does not.  God never jests with us, and will
not compromise the end of nature, by permitting any inconsequence in
its procession.  Any distrust of the permanence of laws, would
paralyze the faculties of man.  Their permanence is sacredly
respected, and his faith therein is perfect.  The wheels and springs
of man are all set to the hypothesis of the permanence of nature.  We
are not built like a ship to be tossed, but like a house to stand.
It is a natural consequence of this structure, that, so long as the
active powers predominate over the reflective, we resist with
indignation any hint that nature is more short-lived or mutable than
spirit.  The broker, the wheelwright, the carpenter, the toll-man,
are much displeased at the intimation.

        But whilst we acquiesce entirely in the permanence of natural
laws, the question of the absolute existence of nature still remains
open.  It is the uniform effect of culture on the human mind, not to
shake our faith in the stability of particular phenomena, as of heat,
water, azote; but to lead us to regard nature as a phenomenon, not a
substance; to attribute necessary existence to spirit; to esteem
nature as an accident and an effect.

        To the senses and the unrenewed understanding, belongs a sort
of instinctive belief in the absolute existence of nature.  In their
view, man and nature are indissolubly joined.  Things are ultimates,
and they never look beyond their sphere.  The presence of Reason mars
this faith.  The first effort of thought tends to relax this
despotism of the senses, which binds us to nature as if we were a
part of it, and shows us nature aloof, and, as it were, afloat.
Until this higher agency intervened, the animal eye sees, with
wonderful accuracy, sharp outlines and colored surfaces.  When the
eye of Reason opens, to outline and surface are at once added, grace
and expression.  These proceed from imagination and affection, and
abate somewhat of the angular distinctness of objects.  If the Reason
be stimulated to more earnest vision, outlines and surfaces become
transparent, and are no longer seen; causes and spirits are seen
through them.  The best moments of life are these delicious
awakenings of the higher powers, and the reverential withdrawing of
nature before its God.

        Let us proceed to indicate the effects of culture.  1. Our
first institution in the Ideal philosophy is a hint from nature
herself.

        Nature is made to conspire with spirit to emancipate us.
Certain mechanical changes, a small alteration in our local position
apprizes us of a dualism.  We are strangely affected by seeing the
shore from a moving ship, from a balloon, or through the tints of an
unusual sky.  The least change in our point of view, gives the whole
world a pictorial air.  A man who seldom rides, needs only to get
into a coach and traverse his own town, to turn the street into a
puppet-show.  The men, the women, -- talking, running, bartering,
fighting, -- the earnest mechanic, the lounger, the beggar, the boys,
the dogs, are unrealized at once, or, at least, wholly detached from
all relation to the observer, and seen as apparent, not substantial
beings.  What new thoughts are suggested by seeing a face of country
quite familiar, in the rapid movement of the rail-road car!  Nay, the
most wonted objects, (make a very slight change in the point of
vision,) please us most.  In a camera obscura, the butcher's cart,
and the figure of one of our own family amuse us.  So a portrait of a
well-known face gratifies us.  Turn the eyes upside down, by looking
at the landscape through your legs, and how agreeable is the picture,
though you have seen it any time these twenty years!

        In these cases, by mechanical means, is suggested the
difference between the observer and the spectacle, -- between man and
nature.  Hence arises a pleasure mixed with awe; I may say, a low
degree of the sublime is felt from the fact, probably, that man is
hereby apprized, that, whilst the world is a spectacle, something in
himself is stable.

        2. In a higher manner, the poet communicates the same pleasure.
By a few strokes he delineates, as on air, the sun, the mountain, the
camp, the city, the hero, the maiden, not different from what we know
them, but only lifted from the ground and afloat before the eye.  He
unfixes the land and the sea, makes them revolve around the axis of
his primary thought, and disposes them anew.  Possessed himself by a
heroic passion, he uses matter as symbols of it.  The sensual man
conforms thoughts to things; the poet conforms things to his
thoughts.  The one esteems nature as rooted and fast; the other, as
fluid, and impresses his being thereon.  To him, the refractory world
is ductile and flexible; he invests dust and stones with humanity,
and makes them the words of the Reason.  The Imagination may be
defined to be, the use which the Reason makes of the material world.
Shakspeare possesses the power of subordinating nature for the
purposes of expression, beyond all poets.  His imperial muse tosses
the creation like a bauble from hand to hand, and uses it to embody
any caprice of thought that is upper-most in his mind.  The remotest
spaces of nature are visited, and the farthest sundered things are
brought together, by a subtle spiritual connection.  We are made
aware that magnitude of material things is relative, and all objects
shrink and expand to serve the passion of the poet.  Thus, in his
sonnets, the lays of birds, the scents and dyes of flowers, he finds
to be the _shadow_ of his beloved; time, which keeps her from him, is
his _chest_; the suspicion she has awakened, is her _ornament_;
 
        The ornament of beauty is Suspect,
        A crow which flies in heaven's sweetest air.
 
        His passion is not the fruit of chance; it swells, as he
speaks, to a city, or a state.
 
        No, it was builded far from accident;
        It suffers not in smiling pomp, nor falls
        Under the brow of thralling discontent;
        It fears not policy, that heretic,
        That works on leases of short numbered hours,
        But all alone stands hugely politic.
 
        In the strength of his constancy, the Pyramids seem to him
recent and transitory.  The freshness of youth and love dazzles him
with its resemblance to morning.
 
        Take those lips away
        Which so sweetly were forsworn;
        And those eyes, -- the break of day,
        Lights that do mislead the morn.
 
        The wild beauty of this hyperbole, I may say, in passing, it
would not be easy to match in literature.

        This transfiguration which all material objects undergo through
the passion of the poet, -- this power which he exerts to dwarf the
great, to magnify the small, -- might be illustrated by a thousand
examples from his Plays.  I have before me the Tempest, and will cite
only these few lines.

        ARIEL.  The strong based promontory
        Have I made shake, and by the spurs plucked up
        The pine and cedar.

        Prospero calls for music to soothe the frantic Alonzo, and his
companions;
 
        A solemn air, and the best comforter
        To an unsettled fancy, cure thy brains
        Now useless, boiled within thy skull.
 
        Again;
 
        The charm dissolves apace,
        And, as the morning steals upon the night,
        Melting the darkness, so their rising senses
        Begin to chase the ignorant fumes that mantle
        Their clearer reason.
        Their understanding
        Begins to swell: and the approaching tide
        Will shortly fill the reasonable shores
        That now lie foul and muddy.

        The perception of real affinities between events, (that is to
say, of _ideal_ affinities, for those only are real,) enables the
poet thus to make free with the most imposing forms and phenomena of
the world, and to assert the predominance of the soul.

        3. Whilst thus the poet animates nature with his own thoughts,
he differs from the philosopher only herein, that the one proposes
Beauty as his main end; the other Truth.  But the philosopher, not
less than the poet, postpones the apparent order and relations of
things to the empire of thought.  "The problem of philosophy,"
according to Plato, "is, for all that exists conditionally, to find a
ground unconditioned and absolute." It proceeds on the faith that a
law determines all phenomena, which being known, the phenomena can be
predicted.  That law, when in the mind, is an idea.  Its beauty is
infinite.  The true philosopher and the true poet are one, and a
beauty, which is truth, and a truth, which is beauty, is the aim of
both.  Is not the charm of one of Plato's or Aristotle's definitions,
strictly like that of the Antigone of Sophocles?  It is, in both
cases, that a spiritual life has been imparted to nature; that the
solid seeming block of matter has been pervaded and dissolved by a
thought; that this feeble human being has penetrated the vast masses
of nature with an informing soul, and recognised itself in their
harmony, that is, seized their law.  In physics, when this is
attained, the memory disburthens itself of its cumbrous catalogues of
particulars, and carries centuries of observation in a single
formula.

        Thus even in physics, the material is degraded before the
spiritual.  The astronomer, the geometer, rely on their irrefragable
analysis, and disdain the results of observation.  The sublime remark
of Euler on his law of arches, "This will be found contrary to all
experience, yet is true;" had already transferred nature into the
mind, and left matter like an outcast corpse.

        4. Intellectual science has been observed to beget invariably a
doubt of the existence of matter.  Turgot said, "He that has never
doubted the existence of matter, may be assured he has no aptitude
for metaphysical inquiries." It fastens the attention upon immortal
necessary uncreated natures, that is, upon Ideas; and in their
presence, we feel that the outward circumstance is a dream and a
shade.  Whilst we wait in this Olympus of gods, we think of nature as
an appendix to the soul.  We ascend into their region, and know that
these are the thoughts of the Supreme Being.  "These are they who
were set up from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever the earth
was.  When he prepared the heavens, they were there; when he
established the clouds above, when he strengthened the fountains of
the deep.  Then they were by him, as one brought up with him.  Of
them took he counsel."

        Their influence is proportionate.  As objects of science, they
are accessible to few men.  Yet all men are capable of being raised
by piety or by passion, into their region.  And no man touches these
divine natures, without becoming, in some degree, himself divine.
Like a new soul, they renew the body.  We become physically nimble
and lightsome; we tread on air; life is no longer irksome, and we
think it will never be so.  No man fears age or misfortune or death,
in their serene company, for he is transported out of the district of
change.  Whilst we behold unveiled the nature of Justice and Truth,
we learn the difference between the absolute and the conditional or
relative.  We apprehend the absolute.  As it were, for the first
time, _we exist_.  We become immortal, for we learn that time and
space are relations of matter; that, with a perception of truth, or a
virtuous will, they have no affinity.

        5. Finally, religion and ethics, which may be fitly called, --
the practice of ideas, or the introduction of ideas into life, --
have an analogous effect with all lower culture, in degrading nature
and suggesting its dependence on spirit.  Ethics and religion differ
herein; that the one is the system of human duties commencing from
man; the other, from God.  Religion includes the personality of God;
Ethics does not.  They are one to our present design.  They both put
nature under foot.  The first and last lesson of religion is, "The
things that are seen, are temporal; the things that are unseen, are
eternal." It puts an affront upon nature.  It does that for the
unschooled, which philosophy does for Berkeley and Viasa.  The
uniform language that may be heard in the churches of the most
ignorant sects, is,------"Contemn the unsubstantial shows of the
world; they are vanities, dreams, shadows, unrealities; seek the
realities of religion." The devotee flouts nature.  Some theosophists
have arrived at a certain hostility and indignation towards matter,
as the Manichean and Plotinus.  They distrusted in themselves any
looking back to these flesh-pots of Egypt.  Plotinus was ashamed of
his body.  In short, they might all say of matter, what Michael
Angelo said of external beauty, "it is the frail and weary weed, in
which God dresses the soul, which he has called into time."

        It appears that motion, poetry, physical and intellectual
science, and religion, all tend to affect our convictions of the
reality of the external world.  But I own there is something
ungrateful in expanding too curiously the particulars of the general
proposition, that all culture tends to imbue us with idealism.  I
have no hostility to nature, but a child's love to it.  I expand and
live in the warm day like corn and melons.  Let us speak her fair.  I
do not wish to fling stones at my beautiful mother, nor soil my
gentle nest.  I only wish to indicate the true position of nature in
regard to man, wherein to establish man, all right education tends;
as the ground which to attain is the object of human life, that is,
of man's connection with nature.  Culture inverts the vulgar views of
nature, and brings the mind to call that apparent, which it uses to
call real, and that real, which it uses to call visionary.  Children,
it is true, believe in the external world.  The belief that it
appears only, is an afterthought, but with culture, this faith will
as surely arise on the mind as did the first.

        The advantage of the ideal theory over the popular faith, is
this, that it presents the world in precisely that view which is most
desirable to the mind.  It is, in fact, the view which Reason, both
speculative and practical, that is, philosophy and virtue, take.
For, seen in the light of thought, the world always is phenomenal;
and virtue subordinates it to the mind.  Idealism sees the world in
God.  It beholds the whole circle of persons and things, of actions
and events, of country and religion, not as painfully accumulated,
atom after atom, act after act, in an aged creeping Past, but as one
vast picture, which God paints on the instant eternity, for the
contemplation of the soul.  Therefore the soul holds itself off from
a too trivial and microscopic study of the universal tablet.  It
respects the end too much, to immerse itself in the means.  It sees
something more important in Christianity, than the scandals of
ecclesiastical history, or the niceties of criticism; and, very
incurious concerning persons or miracles, and not at all disturbed by
chasms of historical evidence, it accepts from God the phenomenon, as
it finds it, as the pure and awful form of religion in the world.  It
is not hot and passionate at the appearance of what it calls its own
good or bad fortune, at the union or opposition of other persons.  No
man is its enemy.  It accepts whatsoever befalls, as part of its
lesson.  It is a watcher more than a doer, and it is a doer, only
that it may the better watch.

 
 

                       _Chapter VII_ SPIRIT

        It is essential to a true theory of nature and of man, that it
should contain somewhat progressive.  Uses that are exhausted or that
may be, and facts that end in the statement, cannot be all that is
true of this brave lodging wherein man is harbored, and wherein all
his faculties find appropriate and endless exercise.  And all the
uses of nature admit of being summed in one, which yields the
activity of man an infinite scope.  Through all its kingdoms, to the
suburbs and outskirts of things, it is faithful to the cause whence
it had its origin.  It always speaks of Spirit.  It suggests the
absolute.  It is a perpetual effect.  It is a great shadow pointing
always to the sun behind us.

        The aspect of nature is devout.  Like the figure of Jesus, she
stands with bended head, and hands folded upon the breast.  The
happiest man is he who learns from nature the lesson of worship.

        Of that ineffable essence which we call Spirit, he that thinks
most, will say least.  We can foresee God in the coarse, and, as it
were, distant phenomena of matter; but when we try to define and
describe himself, both language and thought desert us, and we are as
helpless as fools and savages.  That essence refuses to be recorded
in propositions, but when man has worshipped him intellectually, the
noblest ministry of nature is to stand as the apparition of God.  It
is the organ through which the universal spirit speaks to the
individual, and strives to lead back the individual to it.

        When we consider Spirit, we see that the views already
presented do not include the whole circumference of man.  We must add
some related thoughts.

        Three problems are put by nature to the mind; What is matter?
Whence is it? and Whereto?  The first of these questions only, the
ideal theory answers.  Idealism saith: matter is a phenomenon, not a
substance.  Idealism acquaints us with the total disparity between
the evidence of our own being, and the evidence of the world's being.
The one is perfect; the other, incapable of any assurance; the mind
is a part of the nature of things; the world is a divine dream, from
which we may presently awake to the glories and certainties of day.
Idealism is a hypothesis to account for nature by other principles
than those of carpentry and chemistry.  Yet, if it only deny the
existence of matter, it does not satisfy the demands of the spirit.
It leaves God out of me.  It leaves me in the splendid labyrinth of
my perceptions, to wander without end.  Then the heart resists it,
because it balks the affections in denying substantive being to men
and women.  Nature is so pervaded with human life, that there is
something of humanity in all, and in every particular.  But this
theory makes nature foreign to me, and does not account for that
consanguinity which we acknowledge to it.

        Let it stand, then, in the present state of our knowledge,
merely as a useful introductory hypothesis, serving to apprize us of
the eternal distinction between the soul and the world.

        But when, following the invisible steps of thought, we come to
inquire, Whence is matter? and Whereto? many truths arise to us out
of the recesses of consciousness.  We learn that the highest is
present to the soul of man, that the dread universal essence, which
is not wisdom, or love, or beauty, or power, but all in one, and each
entirely, is that for which all things exist, and that by which they
are; that spirit creates; that behind nature, throughout nature,
spirit is present; one and not compound, it does not act upon us from
without, that is, in space and time, but spiritually, or through
ourselves: therefore, that spirit, that is, the Supreme Being, does
not build up nature around us, but puts it forth through us, as the
life of the tree puts forth new branches and leaves through the pores
of the old.  As a plant upon the earth, so a man rests upon the bosom
of God; he is nourished by unfailing fountains, and draws, at his
need, inexhaustible power.  Who can set bounds to the possibilities
of man?  Once inhale the upper air, being admitted to behold the
absolute natures of justice and truth, and we learn that man has
access to the entire mind of the Creator, is himself the creator in
the finite.  This view, which admonishes me where the sources of
wisdom and power lie, and points to virtue as to

        "The golden key
        Which opes the palace of eternity,"
 
        carries upon its face the highest certificate of truth, because
it animates me to create my own world through the purification of my
soul.

        The world proceeds from the same spirit as the body of man.  It
is a remoter and inferior incarnation of God, a projection of God in
the unconscious.  But it differs from the body in one important
respect.  It is not, like that, now subjected to the human will.  Its
serene order is inviolable by us.  It is, therefore, to us, the
present expositor of the divine mind.  It is a fixed point whereby we
may measure our departure.  As we degenerate, the contrast between us
and our house is more evident.  We are as much strangers in nature,
as we are aliens from God.  We do not understand the notes of birds.
The fox and the deer run away from us; the bear and tiger rend us.
We do not know the uses of more than a few plants, as corn and the
apple, the potato and the vine.  Is not the landscape, every glimpse
of which hath a grandeur, a face of him?  Yet this may show us what
discord is between man and nature, for you cannot freely admire a
noble landscape, if laborers are digging in the field hard by.  The
poet finds something ridiculous in his delight, until he is out of
the sight of men.

 
 

                       _Chapter VIII_ PROSPECTS

        In inquiries respecting the laws of the world and the frame of
things, the highest reason is always the truest.  That which seems
faintly possible -- it is so refined, is often faint and dim because
it is deepest seated in the mind among the eternal verities.
Empirical science is apt to cloud the sight, and, by the very
knowledge of functions and processes, to bereave the student of the
manly contemplation of the whole.  The savant becomes unpoetic.  But
the best read naturalist who lends an entire and devout attention to
truth, will see that there remains much to learn of his relation to
the world, and that it is not to be learned by any addition or
subtraction or other comparison of known quantities, but is arrived
at by untaught sallies of the spirit, by a continual self-recovery,
and by entire humility.  He will perceive that there are far more
excellent qualities in the student than preciseness and
infallibility; that a guess is often more fruitful than an
indisputable affirmation, and that a dream may let us deeper into the
secret of nature than a hundred concerted experiments.

        For, the problems to be solved are precisely those which the
physiologist and the naturalist omit to state.  It is not so
pertinent to man to know all the individuals of the animal kingdom,
as it is to know whence and whereto is this tyrannizing unity in his
constitution, which evermore separates and classifies things,
endeavoring to reduce the most diverse to one form.  When I behold a
rich landscape, it is less to my purpose to recite correctly the
order and superposition of the strata, than to know why all thought
of multitude is lost in a tranquil sense of unity.  I cannot greatly
honor minuteness in details, so long as there is no hint to explain
the relation between things and thoughts; no ray upon the
_metaphysics_ of conchology, of botany, of the arts, to show the
relation of the forms of flowers, shells, animals, architecture, to
the mind, and build science upon ideas.  In a cabinet of natural
history, we become sensible of a certain occult recognition and
sympathy in regard to the most unwieldly and eccentric forms of
beast, fish, and insect.  The American who has been confined, in his
own country, to the sight of buildings designed after foreign models,
is surprised on entering York Minster or St.  Peter's at Rome, by the
feeling that these structures are imitations also, -- faint copies of
an invisible archetype.  Nor has science sufficient humanity, so long
as the naturalist overlooks that wonderful congruity which subsists
between man and the world; of which he is lord, not because he is the
most subtile inhabitant, but because he is its head and heart, and
finds something of himself in every great and small thing, in every
mountain stratum, in every new law of color, fact of astronomy, or
atmospheric influence which observation or analysis lay open.  A
perception of this mystery inspires the muse of George Herbert, the
beautiful psalmist of the seventeenth century.  The following lines
are part of his little poem on Man.

                "Man is all symmetry,
        Full of proportions, one limb to another,
                And to all the world besides.
                Each part may call the farthest, brother;
        For head with foot hath private amity,
                And both with moons and tides.

                "Nothing hath got so far
        But man hath caught and kept it as his prey;
                His eyes dismount the highest star;
                He is in little all the sphere.
        Herbs gladly cure our flesh, because that they
                Find their acquaintance there.

                "For us, the winds do blow,
        The earth doth rest, heaven move, and fountains flow;
                Nothing we see, but means our good,
                As our delight, or as our treasure;
        The whole is either our cupboard of food,
                Or cabinet of pleasure.

                "The stars have us to bed:
        Night draws the curtain; which the sun withdraws.
                Music and light attend our head.
                All things unto our flesh are kind,
        In their descent and being; to our mind,
                In their ascent and cause.

                "More servants wait on man
        Than he'll take notice of.  In every path,
                He treads down that which doth befriend him
                When sickness makes him pale and wan.
        Oh mighty love! Man is one world, and hath
                Another to attend him."

        The perception of this class of truths makes the attraction
which draws men to science, but the end is lost sight of in attention
to the means.  In view of this half-sight of science, we accept the
sentence of Plato, that, "poetry comes nearer to vital truth than
history." Every surmise and vaticination of the mind is entitled to a
certain respect, and we learn to prefer imperfect theories, and
sentences, which contain glimpses of truth, to digested systems which
have no one valuable suggestion.  A wise writer will feel that the
ends of study and composition are best answered by announcing
undiscovered regions of thought, and so communicating, through hope,
new activity to the torpid spirit.

        I shall therefore conclude this essay with some traditions of
man and nature, which a certain poet sang to me; and which, as they
have always been in the world, and perhaps reappear to every bard,
may be both history and prophecy.

        `The foundations of man are not in matter, but in spirit.  But
the element of spirit is eternity.  To it, therefore, the longest
series of events, the oldest chronologies are young and recent.  In
the cycle of the universal man, from whom the known individuals
proceed, centuries are points, and all history is but the epoch of
one degradation.

        `We distrust and deny inwardly our sympathy with nature.  We
own and disown our relation to it, by turns.  We are, like
Nebuchadnezzar, dethroned, bereft of reason, and eating grass like an
ox.  But who can set limits to the remedial force of spirit?

        `A man is a god in ruins.  When men are innocent, life shall be
longer, and shall pass into the immortal, as gently as we awake from
dreams.  Now, the world would be insane and rabid, if these
disorganizations should last for hundreds of years.  It is kept in
check by death and infancy.  Infancy is the perpetual Messiah, which
comes into the arms of fallen men, and pleads with them to return to
paradise.

        `Man is the dwarf of himself.  Once he was permeated and
dissolved by spirit.  He filled nature with his overflowing currents.
Out from him sprang the sun and moon; from man, the sun; from woman,
the moon.  The laws of his mind, the periods of his actions
externized themselves into day and night, into the year and the
seasons.  But, having made for himself this huge shell, his waters
retired; he no longer fills the veins and veinlets; he is shrunk to a
drop.  He sees, that the structure still fits him, but fits him
colossally.  Say, rather, once it fitted him, now it corresponds to
him from far and on high.  He adores timidly his own work.  Now is
man the follower of the sun, and woman the follower of the moon.  Yet
sometimes he starts in his slumber, and wonders at himself and his
house, and muses strangely at the resemblance betwixt him and it.  He
perceives that if his law is still paramount, if still he have
elemental power, if his word is sterling yet in nature, it is not
conscious power, it is not inferior but superior to his will.  It is
Instinct.' Thus my Orphic poet sang.

        At present, man applies to nature but half his force.  He works
on the world with his understanding alone.  He lives in it, and
masters it by a penny-wisdom; and he that works most in it, is but a
half-man, and whilst his arms are strong and his digestion good, his
mind is imbruted, and he is a selfish savage.  His relation to
nature, his power over it, is through the understanding; as by
manure; the economic use of fire, wind, water, and the mariner's
needle; steam, coal, chemical agriculture; the repairs of the human
body by the dentist and the surgeon.  This is such a resumption of
power, as if a banished king should buy his territories inch by inch,
instead of vaulting at once into his throne.  Meantime, in the thick
darkness, there are not wanting gleams of a better light, --
occasional examples of the action of man upon nature with his entire
force, -- with reason as well as understanding.  Such examples are;
the traditions of miracles in the earliest antiquity of all nations;
the history of Jesus Christ; the achievements of a principle, as in
religious and political revolutions, and in the abolition of the
Slave-trade; the miracles of enthusiasm, as those reported of
Swedenborg, Hohenlohe, and the Shakers; many obscure and yet
contested facts, now arranged under the name of Animal Magnetism;
prayer; eloquence; self-healing; and the wisdom of children.  These
are examples of Reason's momentary grasp of the sceptre; the
exertions of a power which exists not in time or space, but an
instantaneous in-streaming causing power.  The difference between the
actual and the ideal force of man is happily figured by the
schoolmen, in saying, that the knowledge of man is an evening
knowledge, _vespertina cognitio_, but that of God is a morning
knowledge, _matutina cognitio_.

        The problem of restoring to the world original and eternal
beauty, is solved by the redemption of the soul.  The ruin or the
blank, that we see when we look at nature, is in our own eye.  The
axis of vision is not coincident with the axis of things, and so they
appear not transparent but opake.  The reason why the world lacks
unity, and lies broken and in heaps, is, because man is disunited
with himself.  He cannot be a naturalist, until he satisfies all the
demands of the spirit.  Love is as much its demand, as perception.
Indeed, neither can be perfect without the other.  In the uttermost
meaning of the words, thought is devout, and devotion is thought.
Deep calls unto deep.  But in actual life, the marriage is not
celebrated.  There are innocent men who worship God after the
tradition of their fathers, but their sense of duty has not yet
extended to the use of all their faculties.  And there are patient
naturalists, but they freeze their subject under the wintry light of
the understanding.  Is not prayer also a study of truth, -- a sally
of the soul into the unfound infinite?  No man ever prayed heartily,
without learning something.  But when a faithful thinker, resolute to
detach every object from personal relations, and see it in the light
of thought, shall, at the same time, kindle science with the fire of
the holiest affections, then will God go forth anew into the
creation.

        It will not need, when the mind is prepared for study, to
search for objects.  The invariable mark of wisdom is to see the
miraculous in the common.  What is a day?  What is a year?  What is
summer?  What is woman?  What is a child?  What is sleep?  To our
blindness, these things seem unaffecting.  We make fables to hide the
baldness of the fact and conform it, as we say, to the higher law of
the mind.  But when the fact is seen under the light of an idea, the
gaudy fable fades and shrivels.  We behold the real higher law.  To
the wise, therefore, a fact is true poetry, and the most beautiful of
fables.  These wonders are brought to our own door.  You also are a
man.  Man and woman, and their social life, poverty, labor, sleep,
fear, fortune, are known to you.  Learn that none of these things is
superficial, but that each phenomenon has its roots in the faculties
and affections of the mind.  Whilst the abstract question occupies
your intellect, nature brings it in the concrete to be solved by your
hands.  It were a wise inquiry for the closet, to compare, point by
point, especially at remarkable crises in life, our daily history,
with the rise and progress of ideas in the mind.

        So shall we come to look at the world with new eyes.  It shall
answer the endless inquiry of the intellect, -- What is truth? and of
the affections, -- What is good? by yielding itself passive to the
educated Will.  Then shall come to pass what my poet said; `Nature is
not fixed but fluid.  Spirit alters, moulds, makes it.  The
immobility or bruteness of nature, is the absence of spirit; to pure
spirit, it is fluid, it is volatile, it is obedient.  Every spirit
builds itself a house; and beyond its house a world; and beyond its
world, a heaven.  Know then, that the world exists for you.  For you
is the phenomenon perfect.  What we are, that only can we see.  All
that Adam had, all that Caesar could, you have and can do.  Adam
called his house, heaven and earth; Caesar called his house, Rome;
you perhaps call yours, a cobler's trade; a hundred acres of ploughed
land; or a scholar's garret.  Yet line for line and point for point,
your dominion is as great as theirs, though without fine names.
Build, therefore, your own world.  As fast as you conform your life
to the pure idea in your mind, that will unfold its great
proportions.  A correspondent revolution in things will attend the
influx of the spirit.  So fast will disagreeable appearances, swine,
spiders, snakes, pests, madhouses, prisons, enemies, vanish; they are
temporary and shall be no more seen.  The sordor and filths of
nature, the sun shall dry up, and the wind exhale.  As when the
summer comes from the south; the snow-banks melt, and the face of the
earth becomes green before it, so shall the advancing spirit create
its ornaments along its path, and carry with it the beauty it visits,
and the song which enchants it; it shall draw beautiful faces, warm
hearts, wise discourse, and heroic acts, around its way, until evil
is no more seen.  The kingdom of man over nature, which cometh not
with observation, -- a dominion such as now is beyond his dream of
God, -- he shall enter without more wonder than the blind man feels
who is gradually restored to perfect sight.'

.
 
        THE TRANSCENDENTALIST
 
        _A Lecture read at the Masonic Temple, Boston,
        January, 1842_

        The first thing we have to say respecting what are called _new
views_ here in New England, at the present time, is, that they are
not new, but the very oldest of thoughts cast into the mould of these
new times.  The light is always identical in its composition, but it
falls on a great variety of objects, and by so falling is first
revealed to us, not in its own form, for it is formless, but in
theirs; in like manner, thought only appears in the objects it
classifies.  What is popularly called Transcendentalism among us, is
Idealism; Idealism as it appears in 1842.  As thinkers, mankind have
ever divided into two sects, Materialists and Idealists; the first
class founding on experience, the second on consciousness; the first
class beginning to think from the data of the senses, the second
class perceive that the senses are not final, and say, the senses
give us representations of things, but what are the things
themselves, they cannot tell.  The materialist insists on facts, on
history, on the force of circumstances, and the animal wants of man;
the idealist on the power of Thought and of Will, on inspiration, on
miracle, on individual culture.  These two modes of thinking are both
natural, but the idealist contends that his way of thinking is in
higher nature.  He concedes all that the other affirms, admits the
impressions of sense, admits their coherency, their use and beauty,
and then asks the materialist for his grounds of assurance that
things are as his senses represent them.  But I, he says, affirm
facts not affected by the illusions of sense, facts which are of the
same nature as the faculty which reports them, and not liable to
doubt; facts which in their first appearance to us assume a native
superiority to material facts, degrading these into a language by
which the first are to be spoken; facts which it only needs a
retirement from the senses to discern.  Every materialist will be an
idealist; but an idealist can never go backward to be a materialist.

        The idealist, in speaking of events, sees them as spirits.  He
does not deny the sensuous fact: by no means; but he will not see
that alone.  He does not deny the presence of this table, this chair,
and the walls of this room, but he looks at these things as the
reverse side of the tapestry, as the _other end_, each being a sequel
or completion of a spiritual fact which nearly concerns him.  This
manner of looking at things, transfers every object in nature from an
independent and anomalous position without there, into the
consciousness.  Even the materialist Condillac, perhaps the most
logical expounder of materialism, was constrained to say, "Though we
should soar into the heavens, though we should sink into the abyss,
we never go out of ourselves; it is always our own thought that we
perceive." What more could an idealist say?

        The materialist, secure in the certainty of sensation, mocks at
fine-spun theories, at star-gazers and dreamers, and believes that
his life is solid, that he at least takes nothing for granted, but
knows where he stands, and what he does.  Yet how easy it is to show
him, that he also is a phantom walking and working amid phantoms, and
that he need only ask a question or two beyond his daily questions,
to find his solid universe growing dim and impalpable before his
sense.  The sturdy capitalist, no matter how deep and square on
blocks of Quincy granite he lays the foundations of his banking-house
or Exchange, must set it, at last, not on a cube corresponding to the
angles of his structure, but on a mass of unknown materials and
solidity, red-hot or white-hot, perhaps at the core, which rounds off
to an almost perfect sphericity, and lies floating in soft air, and
goes spinning away, dragging bank and banker with it at a rate of
thousands of miles the hour, he knows not whither, -- a bit of
bullet, now glimmering, now darkling through a small cubic space on
the edge of an unimaginable pit of emptiness.  And this wild balloon,
in which his whole venture is embarked, is a just symbol of his whole
state and faculty.  One thing, at least, he says is certain, and does
not give me the headache, that figures do not lie; the multiplication
table has been hitherto found unimpeachable truth; and, moreover, if
I put a gold eagle in my safe, I find it again to-morrow; -- but for
these thoughts, I know not whence they are.  They change and pass
away.  But ask him why he believes that an uniform experience will
continue uniform, or on what grounds he founds his faith in his
figures, and he will perceive that his mental fabric is built up on
just as strange and quaking foundations as his proud edifice of
stone.

        In the order of thought, the materialist takes his departure
from the external world, and esteems a man as one product of that.
The idealist takes his departure from his consciousness, and reckons
the world an appearance.  The materialist respects sensible masses,
Society, Government, social art, and luxury, every establishment,
every mass, whether majority of numbers, or extent of space, or
amount of objects, every social action.  The idealist has another
measure, which is metaphysical, namely, the _rank_ which things
themselves take in his consciousness; not at all, the size or
appearance.  Mind is the only reality, of which men and all other
natures are better or worse reflectors.  Nature, literature, history,
are only subjective phenomena.  Although in his action overpowered by
the laws of action, and so, warmly cooperating with men, even
preferring them to himself, yet when he speaks scientifically, or
after the order of thought, he is constrained to degrade persons into
representatives of truths.  He does not respect labor, or the
products of labor, namely, property, otherwise than as a manifold
symbol, illustrating with wonderful fidelity of details the laws of
being; he does not respect government, except as far as it reiterates
the law of his mind; nor the church; nor charities; nor arts, for
themselves; but hears, as at a vast distance, what they say, as if
his consciousness would speak to him through a pantomimic scene.  His
thought, -- that is the Universe.  His experience inclines him to
behold the procession of facts you call the world, as flowing
perpetually outward from an invisible, unsounded centre in himself,
centre alike of him and of them, and necessitating him to regard all
things as having a subjective or relative existence, relative to that
aforesaid Unknown Centre of him.

        From this transfer of the world into the consciousness, this
beholding of all things in the mind, follow easily his whole ethics.
It is simpler to be self-dependent.  The height, the deity of man is,
to be self-sustained, to need no gift, no foreign force.  Society is
good when it does not violate me; but best when it is likest to
solitude.  Everything real is self-existent.  Everything divine
shares the self-existence of Deity.  All that you call the world is
the shadow of that substance which you are, the perpetual creation of
the powers of thought, of those that are dependent and of those that
are independent of your will.  Do not cumber yourself with fruitless
pains to mend and remedy remote effects; let the soul be erect, and
all things will go well.  You think me the child of my circumstances:
I make my circumstance.  Let any thought or motive of mine be
different from that they are, the difference will transform my
condition and economy.  I -- this thought which is called I, -- is
the mould into which the world is poured like melted wax.  The mould
is invisible, but the world betrays the shape of the mould.  You call
it the power of circumstance, but it is the power of me.  Am I in
harmony with myself? my position will seem to you just and
commanding.  Am I vicious and insane? my fortunes will seem to you
obscure and descending.  As I am, so shall I associate, and, so shall
I act; Caesar's history will paint out Caesar.  Jesus acted so,
because he thought so.  I do not wish to overlook or to gainsay any
reality; I say, I make my circumstance: but if you ask me, Whence am
I?  I feel like other men my relation to that Fact which cannot be
spoken, or defined, nor even thought, but which exists, and will
exist.

        The Transcendentalist adopts the whole connection of spiritual
doctrine.  He believes in miracle, in the perpetual openness of the
human mind to new influx of light and power; he believes in
inspiration, and in ecstasy.  He wishes that the spiritual principle
should be suffered to demonstrate itself to the end, in all possible
applications to the state of man, without the admission of anything
unspiritual; that is, anything positive, dogmatic, personal.  Thus,
the spiritual measure of inspiration is the depth of the thought, and
never, who said it?  And so he resists all attempts to palm other
rules and measures on the spirit than its own.

        In action, he easily incurs the charge of antinomianism by his
avowal that he, who has the Lawgiver, may with safety not only
neglect, but even contravene every written commandment.  In the play
of Othello, the expiring Desdemona absolves her husband of the
murder, to her attendant Emilia.  Afterwards, when Emilia charges him
with the crime, Othello exclaims,

        "You heard her say herself it was not I."
 
        Emilia replies,
 
        "The more angel she, and thou the blacker devil."

        Of this fine incident, Jacobi, the Transcendental moralist,
makes use, with other parallel instances, in his reply to Fichte.
Jacobi, refusing all measure of right and wrong except the
determinations of the private spirit, remarks that there is no crime
but has sometimes been a virtue.  "I," he says, "am that atheist,
that godless person who, in opposition to an imaginary doctrine of
calculation, would lie as the dying Desdemona lied; would lie and
deceive, as Pylades when he personated Orestes; would assassinate
like Timoleon; would perjure myself like Epaminondas, and John de
Witt; I would resolve on suicide like Cato; I would commit sacrilege
with David; yea, and pluck ears of corn on the Sabbath, for no other
reason than that I was fainting for lack of food.  For, I have
assurance in myself, that, in pardoning these faults according to the
letter, man exerts the sovereign right which the majesty of his being
confers on him; he sets the seal of his divine nature to the grace he
accords."

        In like manner, if there is anything grand and daring in human
thought or virtue, any reliance on the vast, the unknown; any
presentiment; any extravagance of faith, the spiritualist adopts it
as most in nature.  The oriental mind has always tended to this
largeness.  Buddhism is an expression of it.  The Buddhist who thanks
no man, who says, "do not flatter your benefactors," but who, in his
conviction that every good deed can by no possibility escape its
reward, will not deceive the benefactor by pretending that he has
done more than he should, is a Transcendentalist.

        You will see by this sketch that there is no such thing as a
Transcendental _party_; that there is no pure Transcendentalist; that
we know of none but prophets and heralds of such a philosophy; that
all who by strong bias of nature have leaned to the spiritual side in
doctrine, have stopped short of their goal.  We have had many
harbingers and forerunners; but of a purely spiritual life, history
has afforded no example.  I mean, we have yet no man who has leaned
entirely on his character, and eaten angels' food; who, trusting to
his sentiments, found life made of miracles; who, working for
universal aims, found himself fed, he knew not how; clothed,
sheltered, and weaponed, he knew not how, and yet it was done by his
own hands.  Only in the instinct of the lower animals, we find the
suggestion of the methods of it, and something higher than our
understanding.  The squirrel hoards nuts, and the bee gathers honey,
without knowing what they do, and they are thus provided for without
selfishness or disgrace.

        Shall we say, then, that Transcendentalism is the Saturnalia or
excess of Faith; the presentiment of a faith proper to man in his
integrity, excessive only when his imperfect obedience hinders the
satisfaction of his wish.  Nature is transcendental, exists
primarily, necessarily, ever works and advances, yet takes no thought
for the morrow.  Man owns the dignity of the life which throbs around
him in chemistry, and tree, and animal, and in the involuntary
functions of his own body; yet he is balked when he tries to fling
himself into this enchanted circle, where all is done without
degradation.  Yet genius and virtue predict in man the same absence
of private ends, and of condescension to circumstances, united with
every trait and talent of beauty and power.

        This way of thinking, falling on Roman times, made Stoic
philosophers; falling on despotic times, made patriot Catos and
Brutuses; falling on superstitious times, made prophets and apostles;
on popish times, made protestants and ascetic monks, preachers of
Faith against the preachers of Works; on prelatical times, made
Puritans and Quakers; and falling on Unitarian and commercial times,
makes the peculiar shades of Idealism which we know.

        It is well known to most of my audience, that the Idealism of
the present day acquired the name of Transcendental, from the use of
that term by Immanuel Kant, of Konigsberg, who replied to the
skeptical philosophy of Locke, which insisted that there was nothing
in the intellect which was not previously in the experience of the
senses, by showing that there was a very important class of ideas, or
imperative forms, which did not come by experience, but through which
experience was acquired; that these were intuitions of the mind
itself; and he denominated them _Transcendental_ forms.  The
extraordinary profoundness and precision of that man's thinking have
given vogue to his nomenclature, in Europe and America, to that
extent, that whatever belongs to the class of intuitive thought, is
popularly called at the present day _Transcendental_.

        Although, as we have said, there is no pure Transcendentalist,
yet the tendency to respect the intuitions, and to give them, at
least in our creed, all authority over our experience, has deeply
colored the conversation and poetry of the present day; and the
history of genius and of religion in these times, though impure, and
as yet not incarnated in any powerful individual, will be the history
of this tendency.

        It is a sign of our times, conspicuous to the coarsest
observer, that many intelligent and religious persons withdraw
themselves from the common labors and competitions of the market and
the caucus, and betake themselves to a certain solitary and critical
way of living, from which no solid fruit has yet appeared to justify
their separation.  They hold themselves aloof: they feel the
disproportion between their faculties and the work offered them, and
they prefer to ramble in the country and perish of ennui, to the
degradation of such charities and such ambitions as the city can
propose to them.  They are striking work, and crying out for somewhat
worthy to do!  What they do, is done only because they are
overpowered by the humanities that speak on all sides; and they
consent to such labor as is open to them, though to their lofty dream
the writing of Iliads or Hamlets, or the building of cities or
empires seems drudgery.

        Now every one must do after his kind, be he asp or angel, and
these must.  The question, which a wise man and a student of modern
history will ask, is, what that kind is?  And truly, as in
ecclesiastical history we take so much pains to know what the
Gnostics, what the Essenes, what the Manichees, and what the
Reformers believed, it would not misbecome us to inquire nearer home,
what these companions and contemporaries of ours think and do, at
least so far as these thoughts and actions appear to be not
accidental and personal, but common to many, and the inevitable
flower of the Tree of Time.  Our American literature and spiritual
history are, we confess, in the optative mood; but whoso knows these
seething brains, these admirable radicals, these unsocial
worshippers, these talkers who talk the sun and moon away, will
believe that this heresy cannot pass away without leaving its mark.

        They are lonely; the spirit of their writing and conversation
is lonely; they repel influences; they shun general society; they
incline to shut themselves in their chamber in the house, to live in
the country rather than in the town, and to find their tasks and
amusements in solitude.  Society, to be sure, does not like this very
well; it saith, Whoso goes to walk alone, accuses the whole world; he
declareth all to be unfit to be his companions; it is very uncivil,
nay, insulting; Society will retaliate.  Meantime, this retirement
does not proceed from any whim on the part of these separators; but
if any one will take pains to talk with them, he will find that this
part is chosen both from temperament and from principle; with some
unwillingness, too, and as a choice of the less of two evils; for
these persons are not by nature melancholy, sour, and unsocial, --
they are not stockish or brute, -- but joyous; susceptible,
affectionate; they have even more than others a great wish to be
loved.  Like the young Mozart, they are rather ready to cry ten times
a day, "But are you sure you love me?" Nay, if they tell you their
whole thought, they will own that love seems to them the last and
highest gift of nature; that there are persons whom in their hearts
they daily thank for existing, -- persons whose faces are perhaps
unknown to them, but whose fame and spirit have penetrated their
solitude, -- and for whose sake they wish to exist.  To behold the
beauty of another character, which inspires a new interest in our
own; to behold the beauty lodged in a human being, with such vivacity
of apprehension, that I am instantly forced home to inquire if I am
not deformity itself: to behold in another the expression of a love
so high that it assures itself, -- assures itself also to me against
every possible casualty except my unworthiness; -- these are degrees
on the scale of human happiness, to which they have ascended; and it
is a fidelity to this sentiment which has made common association
distasteful to them.  They wish a just and even fellowship, or none.
They cannot gossip with you, and they do not wish, as they are
sincere and religious, to gratify any mere curiosity which you may
entertain.  Like fairies, they do not wish to be spoken of.  Love me,
they say, but do not ask who is my cousin and my uncle.  If you do
not need to hear my thought, because you can read it in my face and
behavior, then I will tell it you from sunrise to sunset.  If you
cannot divine it, you would not understand what I say.  I will not
molest myself for you.  I do not wish to be profaned.

        And yet, it seems as if this loneliness, and not this love,
would prevail in their circumstances, because of the extravagant
demand they make on human nature.  That, indeed, constitutes a new
feature in their portrait, that they are the most exacting and
extortionate critics.  Their quarrel with every man they meet, is not
with his kind, but with his degree.  There is not enough of him, --
that is the only fault.  They prolong their privilege of childhood in
this wise, of doing nothing, -- but making immense demands on all the
gladiators in the lists of action and fame.  They make us feel the
strange disappointment which overcasts every human youth.  So many
promising youths, and never a finished man!  The profound nature will
have a savage rudeness; the delicate one will be shallow, or the
victim of sensibility; the richly accomplished will have some capital
absurdity; and so every piece has a crack.  'T is strange, but this
masterpiece is a result of such an extreme delicacy, that the most
unobserved flaw in the boy will neutralize the most aspiring genius,
and spoil the work.  Talk with a seaman of the hazards to life in his
profession, and he will ask you, "Where are the old sailors? do you
not see that all are young men?" And we, on this sea of human
thought, in like manner inquire, Where are the old idealists? where
are they who represented to the last generation that extravagant
hope, which a few happy aspirants suggest to ours?  In looking at the
class of counsel, and power, and wealth, and at the matronage of the
land, amidst all the prudence and all the triviality, one asks, Where
are they who represented genius, virtue, the invisible and heavenly
world, to these?  Are they dead, -- taken in early ripeness to the
gods, -- as ancient wisdom foretold their fate?  Or did the high idea
die out of them, and leave their unperfumed body as its tomb and
tablet, announcing to all that the celestial inhabitant, who once
gave them beauty, had departed?  Will it be better with the new
generation?  We easily predict a fair future to each new candidate
who enters the lists, but we are frivolous and volatile, and by low
aims and ill example do what we can to defeat this hope.  Then these
youths bring us a rough but effectual aid.  By their unconcealed
dissatisfaction, they expose our poverty, and the insignificance of
man to man.  A man is a poor limitary benefactor.  He ought to be a
shower of benefits -- a great influence, which should never let his
brother go, but should refresh old merits continually with new ones;
so that, though absent, he should never be out of my mind, his name
never far from my lips; but if the earth should open at my side, or
my last hour were come, his name should be the prayer I should utter
to the Universe.  But in our experience, man is cheap, and friendship
wants its deep sense.  We affect to dwell with our friends in their
absence, but we do not; when deed, word, or letter comes not, they
let us go.  These exacting children advertise us of our wants.  There
is no compliment, no smooth speech with them; they pay you only this
one compliment, of insatiable expectation; they aspire, they severely
exact, and if they only stand fast in this watch-tower, and persist
in demanding unto the end, and without end, then are they terrible
friends, whereof poet and priest cannot choose but stand in awe; and
what if they eat clouds, and drink wind, they have not been without
service to the race of man.

        With this passion for what is great and extraordinary, it
cannot be wondered at, that they are repelled by vulgarity and
frivolity in people.  They say to themselves, It is better to be
alone than in bad company.  And it is really a wish to be met, -- the
wish to find society for their hope and religion, -- which prompts
them to shun what is called society.  They feel that they are never
so fit for friendship, as when they have quitted mankind, and taken
themselves to friend.  A picture, a book, a favorite spot in the
hills or the woods, which they can people with the fair and worthy
creation of the fancy, can give them often forms so vivid, that these
for the time shall seem real, and society the illusion.

        But their solitary and fastidious manners not only withdraw
them from the conversation, but from the labors of the world; they
are not good citizens, not good members of society; unwillingly they
bear their part of the public and private burdens; they do not
willingly share in the public charities, in the public religious
rites, in the enterprises of education, of missions foreign or
domestic, in the abolition of the slave-trade, or in the temperance
society.  They do not even like to vote.  The philanthropists inquire
whether Transcendentalism does not mean sloth: they had as lief hear
that their friend is dead, as that he is a Transcendentalist; for
then is he paralyzed, and can never do anything for humanity.  What
right, cries the good world, has the man of genius to retreat from
work, and indulge himself?  The popular literary creed seems to be,
`I am a sublime genius; I ought not therefore to labor.' But genius
is the power to labor better and more availably.  Deserve thy genius:
exalt it.  The good, the illuminated, sit apart from the rest,
censuring their dulness and vices, as if they thought that, by
sitting very grand in their chairs, the very brokers, attorneys, and
congressmen would see the error of their ways, and flock to them.
But the good and wise must learn to act, and carry salvation to the
combatants and demagogues in the dusty arena below.

        On the part of these children, it is replied, that life and
their faculty seem to them gifts too rich to be squandered on such
trifles as you propose to them.  What you call your fundamental
institutions, your great and holy causes, seem to them great abuses,
and, when nearly seen, paltry matters.  Each `Cause,' as it is
called, -- say Abolition, Temperance, say Calvinism, or Unitarianism,
-- becomes speedily a little shop, where the article, let it have
been at first never so subtle and ethereal, is now made up into
portable and convenient cakes, and retailed in small quantities to
suit purchasers.  You make very free use of these words `great' and
`holy,' but few things appear to them such.  Few persons have any
magnificence of nature to inspire enthusiasm, and the philanthropies
and charities have a certain air of quackery.  As to the general
course of living, and the daily employments of men, they cannot see
much virtue in these, since they are parts of this vicious circle;
and, as no great ends are answered by the men, there is nothing noble
in the arts by which they are maintained.  Nay, they have made the
experiment, and found that, from the liberal professions to the
coarsest manual labor, and from the courtesies of the academy and the
college to the conventions of the cotillon-room and the morning call,
there is a spirit of cowardly compromise and seeming, which intimates
a frightful skepticism, a life without love, and an activity without
an aim.

        Unless the action is necessary, unless it is adequate, I do not
wish to perform it.  I do not wish to do one thing but once.  I do
not love routine.  Once possessed of the principle, it is equally
easy to make four or forty thousand applications of it.  A great man
will be content to have indicated in any the slightest manner his
perception of the reigning Idea of his time, and will leave to those
who like it the multiplication of examples.  When he has hit the
white, the rest may shatter the target.  Every thing admonishes us
how needlessly long life is.  Every moment of a hero so raises and
cheers us, that a twelve-month is an age.  All that the brave Xanthus
brings home from his wars, is the recollection that, at the storming
of Samos, "in the heat of the battle, Pericles smiled on me, and
passed on to another detachment." It is the quality of the moment,
not the number of days, of events, or of actors, that imports.

        New, we confess, and by no means happy, is our condition: if
you want the aid of our labor, we ourselves stand in greater want of
the labor.  We are miserable with inaction.  We perish of rest and
rust: but we do not like your work.

        `Then,' says the world, `show me your own.'

        `We have none.'

        `What will you do, then?' cries the world.

        `We will wait.'

        `How long?'

        `Until the Universe rises up and calls us to work.'

        `But whilst you wait, you grow old and useless.'

        `Be it so: I can sit in a corner and _perish_, (as you call
it,) but I will not move until I have the highest command.  If no
call should come for years, for centuries, then I know that the want
of the Universe is the attestation of faith by my abstinence.  Your
virtuous projects, so called, do not cheer me.  I know that which
shall come will cheer me.  If I cannot work, at least I need not lie.
All that is clearly due to-day is not to lie.  In other places, other
men have encountered sharp trials, and have behaved themselves well.
The martyrs were sawn asunder, or hung alive on meat-hooks.  Cannot
we screw our courage to patience and truth, and without complaint, or
even with good-humor, await our turn of action in the Infinite
Counsels?'

        But, to come a little closer to the secret of these persons, we
must say, that to them it seems a very easy matter to answer the
objections of the man of the world, but not so easy to dispose of the
doubts and objections that occur to themselves.  They are exercised
in their own spirit with queries, which acquaint them with all
adversity, and with the trials of the bravest heroes.  When I asked
them concerning their private experience, they answered somewhat in
this wise: It is not to be denied that there must be some wide
difference between my faith and other faith; and mine is a certain
brief experience, which surprised me in the highway or in the market,
in some place, at some time, -- whether in the body or out of the
body, God knoweth, -- and made me aware that I had played the fool
with fools all this time, but that law existed for me and for all;
that to me belonged trust, a child's trust and obedience, and the
worship of ideas, and I should never be fool more.  Well, in the
space of an hour, probably, I was let down from this height; I was at
my old tricks, the selfish member of a selfish society.  My life is
superficial, takes no root in the deep world; I ask, When shall I
die, and be relieved of the responsibility of seeing an Universe
which I do not use?  I wish to exchange this flash-of-lightning faith
for continuous daylight, this fever-glow for a benign climate.

        These two states of thought diverge every moment, and stand in
wild contrast.  To him who looks at his life from these moments of
illumination, it will seem that he skulks and plays a mean,
shiftless, and subaltern part in the world.  That is to be done which
he has not skill to do, or to be said which others can say better,
and he lies by, or occupies his hands with some plaything, until his
hour comes again.  Much of our reading, much of our labor, seems mere
waiting: it was not that we were born for.  Any other could do it as
well, or better.  So little skill enters into these works, so little
do they mix with the divine life, that it really signifies little
what we do, whether we turn a grindstone, or ride, or run, or make
fortunes, or govern the state.  The worst feature of this double
consciousness is, that the two lives, of the understanding and of the
soul, which we lead, really show very little relation to each other,
never meet and measure each other: one prevails now, all buzz and
din; and the other prevails then, all infinitude and paradise; and,
with the progress of life, the two discover no greater disposition to
reconcile themselves.  Yet, what is my faith?  What am I?  What but a
thought of serenity and independence, an abode in the deep blue sky?
Presently the clouds shut down again; yet we retain the belief that
this petty web we weave will at last be overshot and reticulated with
veins of the blue, and that the moments will characterize the days.
Patience, then, is for us, is it not?  Patience, and still patience.
When we pass, as presently we shall, into some new infinitude, out of
this Iceland of negations, it will please us to reflect that, though
we had few virtues or consolations, we bore with our indigence, nor
once strove to repair it with hypocrisy or false heat of any kind.

        But this class are not sufficiently characterized, if we omit
to add that they are lovers and worshippers of Beauty.  In the
eternal trinity of Truth, Goodness, and Beauty, each in its
perfection including the three, they prefer to make Beauty the sign
and head.  Something of the same taste is observable in all the moral
movements of the time, in the religious and benevolent enterprises.
They have a liberal, even an aesthetic spirit.  A reference to Beauty
in action sounds, to be sure, a little hollow and ridiculous in the
ears of the old church.  In politics, it has often sufficed, when
they treated of justice, if they kept the bounds of selfish
calculation.  If they granted restitution, it was prudence which
granted it.  But the justice which is now claimed for the black, and
the pauper, and the drunkard is for Beauty, -- is for a necessity to
the soul of the agent, not of the beneficiary.  I say, this is the
tendency, not yet the realization.  Our virtue totters and trips,
does not yet walk firmly.  Its representatives are austere; they
preach and denounce; their rectitude is not yet a grace.  They are
still liable to that slight taint of burlesque which, in our strange
world, attaches to the zealot.  A saint should be as dear as the
apple of the eye.  Yet we are tempted to smile, and we flee from the
working to the speculative reformer, to escape that same slight
ridicule.  Alas for these days of derision and criticism!  We call
the Beautiful the highest, because it appears to us the golden mean,
escaping the dowdiness of the good, and the heartlessness of the
true.  -- They are lovers of nature also, and find an indemnity in
the inviolable order of the world for the violated order and grace of
man.

        There is, no doubt, a great deal of well-founded objection to
be spoken or felt against the sayings and doings of this class, some
of whose traits we have selected; no doubt, they will lay themselves
open to criticism and to lampoons, and as ridiculous stories will be
to be told of them as of any.  There will be cant and pretension;
there will be subtilty and moonshine.  These persons are of unequal
strength, and do not all prosper.  They complain that everything
around them must be denied; and if feeble, it takes all their
strength to deny, before they can begin to lead their own life.
Grave seniors insist on their respect to this institution, and that
usage; to an obsolete history; to some vocation, or college, or
etiquette, or beneficiary, or charity, or morning or evening call,
which they resist, as what does not concern them.  But it costs such
sleepless nights, alienations and misgivings, -- they have so many
moods about it; -- these old guardians never change _their_ minds;
they have but one mood on the subject, namely, that Antony is very
perverse, -- that it is quite as much as Antony can do, to assert his
rights, abstain from what he thinks foolish, and keep his temper.  He
cannot help the reaction of this injustice in his own mind.  He is
braced-up and stilted; all freedom and flowing genius, all sallies of
wit and frolic nature are quite out of the question; it is well if he
can keep from lying, injustice, and suicide.  This is no time for
gaiety and grace.  His strength and spirits are wasted in rejection.
But the strong spirits overpower those around them without effort.
Their thought and emotion comes in like a flood, quite withdraws them
from all notice of these carping critics; they surrender themselves
with glad heart to the heavenly guide, and only by implication reject
the clamorous nonsense of the hour.  Grave seniors talk to the deaf,
-- church and old book mumble and ritualize to an unheeding,
preoccupied and advancing mind, and thus they by happiness of greater
momentum lose no time, but take the right road at first.

        But all these of whom I speak are not proficients; they are
novices; they only show the road in which man should travel, when the
soul has greater health and prowess.  Yet let them feel the dignity
of their charge, and deserve a larger power.  Their heart is the ark
in which the fire is concealed, which shall burn in a broader and
universal flame.  Let them obey the Genius then most when his impulse
is wildest; then most when he seems to lead to uninhabitable desarts
of thought and life; for the path which the hero travels alone is the
highway of health and benefit to mankind.  What is the privilege and
nobility of our nature, but its persistency, through its power to
attach itself to what is permanent?

        Society also has its duties in reference to this class, and
must behold them with what charity it can.  Possibly some benefit may
yet accrue from them to the state.  In our Mechanics' Fair, there
must be not only bridges, ploughs, carpenters' planes, and baking
troughs, but also some few finer instruments, -- raingauges,
thermometers, and telescopes; and in society, besides farmers,
sailors, and weavers, there must be a few persons of purer fire kept
specially as gauges and meters of character; persons of a fine,
detecting instinct, who betray the smallest accumulations of wit and
feeling in the bystander.  Perhaps too there might be room for the
exciters and monitors; collectors of the heavenly spark with power to
convey the electricity to others.  Or, as the storm-tossed vessel at
sea speaks the frigate or `line packet' to learn its longitude, so it
may not be without its advantage that we should now and then
encounter rare and gifted men, to compare the points of our spiritual
compass, and verify our bearings from superior chronometers.

        Amidst the downward tendency and proneness of things, when
every voice is raised for a new road or another statute, or a
subscription of stock, for an improvement in dress, or in dentistry,
for a new house or a larger business, for a political party, or the
division of an estate, -- will you not tolerate one or two solitary
voices in the land, speaking for thoughts and principles not
marketable or perishable?  Soon these improvements and mechanical
inventions will be superseded; these modes of living lost out of
memory; these cities rotted, ruined by war, by new inventions, by new
seats of trade, or the geologic changes: -- all gone, like the shells
which sprinkle the seabeach with a white colony to-day, forever
renewed to be forever destroyed.  But the thoughts which these few
hermits strove to proclaim by silence, as well as by speech, not only
by what they did, but by what they forbore to do, shall abide in
beauty and strength, to reorganize themselves in nature, to invest
themselves anew in other, perhaps higher endowed and happier mixed
clay than ours, in fuller union with the surrounding system.
.
        ESSAYS
        _Second Series_
        by Ralph Waldo Emerson

 
        THE POET
 
 
        A moody child and wildly wise
        Pursued the game with joyful eyes,
        Which chose, like meteors, their way,
        And rived the dark with private ray:
        They overleapt the horizon's edge,
        Searched with Apollo's privilege;
        Through man, and woman, and sea, and star,
        Saw the dance of nature forward far;
        Through worlds, and races, and terms, and times,
        Saw musical order, and pairing rhymes.

 
        Olympian bards who sung
        Divine ideas below,
        Which always find us young,
        And always keep us so.

 
 
        ESSAY I _The Poet_

        Those who are esteemed umpires of taste, are often persons
knowledge of admired pictures or sculptures, and have an inclination
for whatever is elegant; but if you inquire whether they are
beautiful souls, and whether their own acts are like fair pictures,
you learn that they are selfish and sensual.  Their cultivation is
local, as if you should rub a log of dry wood in one spot to produce
fire, all the rest remaining cold.  Their knowledge of the fine arts
is some study of rules and particulars, or some limited judgment of
color or form, which is exercised for amusement or for show.  It is a
proof of the shallowness of the doctrine of beauty, as it lies in the
minds of our amateurs, that men seem to have lost the perception of
the instant dependence of form upon soul.  There is no doctrine of
forms in our philosophy.  We were put into our bodies, as fire is put
into a pan, to be carried about; but there is no accurate adjustment
between the spirit and the organ, much less is the latter the
germination of the former.  So in regard to other forms, the
intellectual men do not believe in any essential dependence of the
material world on thought and volition.  Theologians think it a
pretty air-castle to talk of the spiritual meaning of a ship or a
cloud, of a city or a contract, but they prefer to come again to the
solid ground of historical evidence; and even the poets are contented
with a civil and conformed manner of living, and to write poems from
the fancy, at a safe distance from their own experience.  But the
highest minds of the world have never ceased to explore the double
meaning, or, shall I say, the quadruple, or the centuple, or much
more manifold meaning, of every sensuous fact: Orpheus, Empedocles,
Heraclitus, Plato, Plutarch, Dante, Swedenborg, and the masters of
sculpture, picture, and poetry.  For we are not pans and barrows, nor
even porters of the fire and torch-bearers, but children of the fire,
made of it, and only the same divinity transmuted, and at two or
three removes, when we know least about it.  And this hidden truth,
that the fountains whence all this river of Time, and its creatures,
floweth, are intrinsically ideal and beautiful, draws us to the
consideration of the nature and functions of the Poet, or the man of
Beauty, to the means and materials he uses, and to the general aspect
of the art in the present time.

        The breadth of the problem is great, for the poet is
representative.  He stands among partial men for the complete man,
and apprises us not of his wealth, but of the common-wealth.  The
young man reveres men of genius, because, to speak truly, they are
more himself than he is.  They receive of the soul as he also
receives, but they more.  Nature enhances her beauty, to the eye of
loving men, from their belief that the poet is beholding her shows at
the same time.  He is isolated among his contemporaries, by truth and
by his art, but with this consolation in his pursuits, that they will
draw all men sooner or later.  For all men live by truth, and stand
in need of expression.  In love, in art, in avarice, in politics, in
labor, in games, we study to utter our painful secret.  The man is
only half himself, the other half is his expression.

        Notwithstanding this necessity to be published, adequate
expression is rare.  I know not how it is that we need an
interpreter; but the great majority of men seem to be minors, who
have not yet come into possession of their own, or mutes, who cannot
report the conversation they have had with nature.  There is no man
who does not anticipate a supersensual utility in the sun, and stars,
earth, and water.  These stand and wait to render him a peculiar
service.  But there is some obstruction, or some excess of phlegm in
our constitution, which does not suffer them to yield the due effect.
Too feeble fall the impressions of nature on us to make us artists.
Every touch should thrill.  Every man should be so much an artist,
that he could report in conversation what had befallen him.  Yet, in
our experience, the rays or appulses have sufficient force to arrive
at the senses, but not enough to reach the quick, and compel the
reproduction of themselves in speech.  The poet is the person in whom
these powers are in balance, the man without impediment, who sees and
handles that which others dream of, traverses the whole scale of
experience, and is representative of man, in virtue of being the
largest power to receive and to impart.

 
        For the Universe has three children, born at one time, which
reappear, under different names, in every system of thought, whether
they be called cause, operation, and effect; or, more poetically,
Jove, Pluto, Neptune; or, theologically, the Father, the Spirit, and
the Son; but which we will call here, the Knower, the Doer, and the
Sayer.  These stand respectively for the love of truth, for the love
of good, and for the love of beauty.  These three are equal.  Each is
that which he is essentially, so that he cannot be surmounted or
analyzed, and each of these three has the power of the others latent
in him, and his own patent.

        The poet is the sayer, the namer, and represents beauty.  He is
a sovereign, and stands on the centre.  For the world is not painted,
or adorned, but is from the beginning beautiful; and God has not made
some beautiful things, but Beauty is the creator of the universe.
Therefore the poet is not any permissive potentate, but is emperor in
his own right.  Criticism is infested with a cant of materialism,
which assumes that manual skill and activity is the first merit of
all men, and disparages such as say and do not, overlooking the fact,
that some men, namely, poets, are natural sayers, sent into the world
to the end of expression, and confounds them with those whose
province is action, but who quit it to imitate the sayers.  But
Homer's words are as costly and admirable to Homer, as Agamemnon's
victories are to Agamemnon.  The poet does not wait for the hero or
the sage, but, as they act and think primarily, so he writes
primarily what will and must be spoken, reckoning the others, though
primaries also, yet, in respect to him, secondaries and servants; as
sitters or models in the studio of a painter, or as assistants who
bring building materials to an architect.

        For poetry was all written before time was, and whenever we are
so finely organized that we can penetrate into that region where the
air is music, we hear those primal warblings, and attempt to write
them down, but we lose ever and anon a word, or a verse, and
substitute something of our own, and thus miswrite the poem.  The men
of more delicate ear write down these cadences more faithfully, and
these transcripts, though imperfect, become the songs of the nations.
For nature is as truly beautiful as it is good, or as it is
reasonable, and must as much appear, as it must be done, or be known.
Words and deeds are quite indifferent modes of the divine energy.
Words are also actions, and actions are a kind of words.

        The sign and credentials of the poet are, that he announces
that which no man foretold.  He is the true and only doctor; he knows
and tells; he is the only teller of news, for he was present and
privy to the appearance which he describes.  He is a beholder of
ideas, and an utterer of the necessary and causal.  For we do not
speak now of men of poetical talents, or of industry and skill in
metre, but of the true poet.  I took part in a conversation the other
day, concerning a recent writer of lyrics, a man of subtle mind,
whose head appeared to be a music-box of delicate tunes and rhythms,
and whose skill, and command of language, we could not sufficiently
praise.  But when the question arose, whether he was not only a
lyrist, but a poet, we were obliged to confess that he is plainly a
contemporary, not an eternal man.  He does not stand out of our low
limitations, like a Chimborazo under the line, running up from the
torrid base through all the climates of the globe, with belts of the
herbage of every latitude on its high and mottled sides; but this
genius is the landscape-garden of a modern house, adorned with
fountains and statues, with well-bred men and women standing and
sitting in the walks and terraces.  We hear, through all the varied
music, the ground-tone of conventional life.  Our poets are men of
talents who sing, and not the children of music.  The argument is
secondary, the finish of the verses is primary.

        For it is not metres, but a metre-making argument, that makes a
poem, -- a thought so passionate and alive, that, like the spirit of
a plant or an animal, it has an architecture of its own, and adorns
nature with a new thing.  The thought and the form are equal in the
order of time, but in the order of genesis the thought is prior to
the form.  The poet has a new thought: he has a whole new experience
to unfold; he will tell us how it was with him, and all men will be
the richer in his fortune.  For, the experience of each new age
requires a new confession, and the world seems always waiting for its
poet.  I remember, when I was young, how much I was moved one morning
by tidings that genius had appeared in a youth who sat near me at
table.  He had left his work, and gone rambling none knew whither,
and had written hundreds of lines, but could not tell whether that
which was in him was therein told: he could tell nothing but that all
was changed, -- man, beast, heaven, earth, and sea.  How gladly we
listened! how credulous!  Society seemed to be compromised.  We sat
in the aurora of a sunrise which was to put out all the stars.
Boston seemed to be at twice the distance it had the night before, or
was much farther than that.  Rome, -- what was Rome?  Plutarch and
Shakspeare were in the yellow leaf, and Homer no more should be heard
of.  It is much to know that poetry has been written this very day,
under this very roof, by your side.  What! that wonderful spirit has
not expired! these stony moments are still sparkling and animated!  I
had fancied that the oracles were all silent, and nature had spent
her fires, and behold! all night, from every pore, these fine auroras
have been streaming.  Every one has some interest in the advent of
the poet, and no one knows how much it may concern him.  We know that
the secret of the world is profound, but who or what shall be our
interpreter, we know not.  A mountain ramble, a new style of face, a
new person, may put the key into our hands.  Of course, the value of
genius to us is in the veracity of its report.  Talent may frolic and
juggle; genius realizes and adds.  Mankind, in good earnest, have
availed so far in understanding themselves and their work, that the
foremost watchman on the peak announces his news.  It is the truest
word ever spoken, and the phrase will be the fittest, most musical,
and the unerring voice of the world for that time.

        All that we call sacred history attests that the birth of a
poet is the principal event in chronology.  Man, never so often
deceived, still watches for the arrival of a brother who can hold him
steady to a truth, until he has made it his own.  With what joy I
begin to read a poem, which I confide in as an inspiration!  And now
my chains are to be broken; I shall mount above these clouds and
opaque airs in which I live, -- opaque, though they seem transparent,
-- and from the heaven of truth I shall see and comprehend my
relations.  That will reconcile me to life, and renovate nature, to
see trifles animated by a tendency, and to know what I am doing.
Life will no more be a noise; now I shall see men and women, and know
the signs by which they may be discerned from fools and satans.  This
day shall be better than my birth-day: then I became an animal: now I
am invited into the science of the real.  Such is the hope, but the
fruition is postponed.  Oftener it falls, that this winged man, who
will carry me into the heaven, whirls me into the clouds, then leaps
and frisks about with me from cloud to cloud, still affirming that he
is bound heavenward; and I, being myself a novice, am slow in
perceiving that he does not know the way into the heavens, and is
merely bent that I should admire his skill to rise, like a fowl or a
flying fish, a little way from the ground or the water; but the
all-piercing, all-feeding, and ocular air of heaven, that man shall
never inhabit.  I tumble down again soon into my old nooks, and lead
the life of exaggerations as before, and have lost my faith in the
possibility of any guide who can lead me thither where I would be.

        But leaving these victims of vanity, let us, with new hope,
observe how nature, by worthier impulses, has ensured the poet's
fidelity to his office of announcement and affirming, namely, by the
beauty of things, which becomes a new, and higher beauty, when
expressed.  Nature offers all her creatures to him as a
picture-language.  Being used as a type, a second wonderful value
appears in the object, far better than its old value, as the
carpenter's stretched cord, if you hold your ear close enough, is
musical in the breeze.  "Things more excellent than every image,"
says Jamblichus, "are expressed through images." Things admit of
being used as symbols, because nature is a symbol, in the whole, and
in every part.  Every line we can draw in the sand, has expression;
and there is no body without its spirit or genius.  All form is an
effect of character; all condition, of the quality of the life; all
harmony, of health; (and, for this reason, a perception of beauty
should be sympathetic, or proper only to the good.) The beautiful
rests on the foundations of the necessary.  The soul makes the body,
as the wise Spenser teaches: --

        "So every spirit, as it is most pure,
        And hath in it the more of heavenly light,
        So it the fairer body doth procure
        To habit in, and it more fairly dight,
        With cheerful grace and amiable sight.
        For, of the soul, the body form doth take,
        For soul is form, and doth the body make."
 
        Here we find ourselves, suddenly, not in a critical
speculation, but in a holy place, and should go very warily and
reverently.  We stand before the secret of the world, there where
Being passes into Appearance, and Unity into Variety.

        The Universe is the externisation of the soul.  Wherever the
life is, that bursts into appearance around it.  Our science is
sensual, and therefore superficial.  The earth, and the heavenly
bodies, physics, and chemistry, we sensually treat, as if they were
self-existent; but these are the retinue of that Being we have.  "The
mighty heaven," said Proclus, "exhibits, in its transfigurations,
clear images of the splendor of intellectual perceptions; being moved
in conjunction with the unapparent periods of intellectual natures."
Therefore, science always goes abreast with the just elevation of the
man, keeping step with religion and metaphysics; or, the state of
science is an index of our self-knowledge.  Since everything in
nature answers to a moral power, if any phenomenon remains brute and
dark, it is that the corresponding faculty in the observer is not yet
active.

        No wonder, then, if these waters be so deep, that we hover over
them with a religious regard.  The beauty of the fable proves the
importance of the sense; to the poet, and to all others; or, if you
please, every man is so far a poet as to be susceptible of these
enchantments of nature: for all men have the thoughts whereof the
universe is the celebration.  I find that the fascination resides in
the symbol.  Who loves nature?  Who does not?  Is it only poets, and
men of leisure and cultivation, who live with her?  No; but also
hunters, farmers, grooms, and butchers, though they express their
affection in their choice of life, and not in their choice of words.
The writer wonders what the coachman or the hunter values in riding,
in horses, and dogs.  It is not superficial qualities.  When you talk
with him, he holds these at as slight a rate as you.  His worship is
sympathetic; he has no definitions, but he is commanded in nature, by
the living power which he feels to be there present.  No imitation,
or playing of these things, would content him; he loves the earnest
of the northwind, of rain, of stone, and wood, and iron.  A beauty
not explicable, is dearer than a beauty which we can see to the end
of.  It is nature the symbol, nature certifying the supernatural,
body overflowed by life, which he worships, with coarse, but sincere
rites.

        The inwardness, and mystery, of this attachment, drives men of
every class to the use of emblems.  The schools of poets, and
philosophers, are not more intoxicated with their symbols, than the
populace with theirs.  In our political parties, compute the power of
badges and emblems.  See the great ball which they roll from
Baltimore to Bunker hill!  In the political processions, Lowell goes
in a loom, and Lynn in a shoe, and Salem in a ship.  Witness the
cider-barrel, the log-cabin, the hickory-stick, the palmetto, and all
the cognizances of party.  See the power of national emblems.  Some
stars, lilies, leopards, a crescent, a lion, an eagle, or other
figure, which came into credit God knows how, on an old rag of
bunting, blowing in the wind, on a fort, at the ends of the earth,
shall make the blood tingle under the rudest, or the most
conventional exterior.  The people fancy they hate poetry, and they
are all poets and mystics!

        Beyond this universality of the symbolic language, we are
apprised of the divineness of this superior use of things, whereby
the world is a temple, whose walls are covered with emblems,
pictures, and commandments of the Deity, in this, that there is no
fact in nature which does not carry the whole sense of nature; and
the distinctions which we make in events, and in affairs, of low and
high, honest and base, disappear when nature is used as a symbol.
Thought makes every thing fit for use.  The vocabulary of an
omniscient man would embrace words and images excluded from polite
conversation.  What would be base, or even obscene, to the obscene,
becomes illustrious, spoken in a new connexion of thought.  The piety
of the Hebrew prophets purges their grossness.  The circumcision is
an example of the power of poetry to raise the low and offensive.
Small and mean things serve as well as great symbols.  The meaner the
type by which a law is expressed, the more pungent it is, and the
more lasting in the memories of men: just as we choose the smallest
box, or case, in which any needful utensil can be carried.  Bare
lists of words are found suggestive, to an imaginative and excited
mind; as it is related of Lord Chatham, that he was accustomed to
read in Bailey's Dictionary, when he was preparing to speak in
Parliament.  The poorest experience is rich enough for all the
purposes of expressing thought.  Why covet a knowledge of new facts?
Day and night, house and garden, a few books, a few actions, serve us
as well as would all trades and all spectacles.  We are far from
having exhausted the significance of the few symbols we use.  We can
come to use them yet with a terrible simplicity.  It does not need
that a poem should be long.  Every word was once a poem.  Every new
relation is a new word.  Also, we use defects and deformities to a
sacred purpose, so expressing our sense that the evils of the world
are such only to the evil eye.  In the old mythology, mythologists
observe, defects are ascribed to divine natures, as lameness to
Vulcan, blindness to Cupid, and the like, to signify exuberances.

        For, as it is dislocation and detachment from the life of God,
that makes things ugly, the poet, who re-attaches things to nature
and the Whole, -- re-attaching even artificial things, and violations
of nature, to nature, by a deeper insight, -- disposes very easily of
the most disagreeable facts.  Readers of poetry see the
factory-village, and the railway, and fancy that the poetry of the
landscape is broken up by these; for these works of art are not yet
consecrated in their reading; but the poet sees them fall within the
great Order not less than the beehive, or the spider's geometrical
web.  Nature adopts them very fast into her vital circles, and the
gliding train of cars she loves like her own.  Besides, in a centred
mind, it signifies nothing how many mechanical inventions you
exhibit.  Though you add millions, and never so surprising, the fact
of mechanics has not gained a grain's weight.  The spiritual fact
remains unalterable, by many or by few particulars; as no mountain is
of any appreciable height to break the curve of the sphere.  A shrewd
country-boy goes to the city for the first time, and the complacent
citizen is not satisfied with his little wonder.  It is not that he
does not see all the fine houses, and know that he never saw such
before, but he disposes of them as easily as the poet finds place for
the railway.  The chief value of the new fact, is to enhance the
great and constant fact of Life, which can dwarf any and every
circumstance, and to which the belt of wampum, and the commerce of
America, are alike.

        The world being thus put under the mind for verb and noun, the
poet is he who can articulate it.  For, though life is great, and
fascinates, and absorbs, -- and though all men are intelligent of the
symbols through which it is named, -- yet they cannot originally use
them.  We are symbols, and inhabit symbols; workman, work, and tools,
words and things, birth and death, all are emblems; but we sympathize
with the symbols, and, being infatuated with the economical uses of
things, we do not know that they are thoughts.  The poet, by an
ulterior intellectual perception, gives them a power which makes
their old use forgotten, and puts eyes, and a tongue, into every dumb
and inanimate object.  He perceives the independence of the thought
on the symbol, the stability of the thought, the accidency and
fugacity of the symbol.  As the eyes of Lyncaeus were said to see
through the earth, so the poet turns the world to glass, and shows us
all things in their right series and procession.  For, through that
better perception, he stands one step nearer to things, and sees the
flowing or metamorphosis; perceives that thought is multiform; that
within the form of every creature is a force impelling it to ascend
into a higher form; and, following with his eyes the life, uses the
forms which express that life, and so his speech flows with the
flowing of nature.  All the facts of the animal economy, sex,
nutriment, gestation, birth, growth, are symbols of the passage of
the world into the soul of man, to suffer there a change, and
reappear a new and higher fact.  He uses forms according to the life,
and not according to the form.  This is true science.  The poet alone
knows astronomy, chemistry, vegetation, and animation, for he does
not stop at these facts, but employs them as signs.  He knows why the
plain, or meadow of space, was strown with these flowers we call
suns, and moons, and stars; why the great deep is adorned with
animals, with men, and gods; for, in every word he speaks he rides on
them as the horses of thought.

        By virtue of this science the poet is the Namer, or
Language-maker, naming things sometimes after their appearance,
sometimes after their essence, and giving to every one its own name
and not another's, thereby rejoicing the intellect, which delights in
detachment or boundary.  The poets made all the words, and therefore
language is the archives of history, and, if we must say it, a sort
of tomb of the muses.  For, though the origin of most of our words is
forgotten, each word was at first a stroke of genius, and obtained
currency, because for the moment it symbolized the world to the first
speaker and to the hearer.  The etymologist finds the deadest word to
have been once a brilliant picture.  Language is fossil poetry.  As
the limestone of the continent consists of infinite masses of the
shells of animalcules, so language is made up of images, or tropes,
which now, in their secondary use, have long ceased to remind us of
their poetic origin.  But the poet names the thing because he sees
it, or comes one step nearer to it than any other.  This expression,
or naming, is not art, but a second nature, grown out of the first,
as a leaf out of a tree.  What we call nature, is a certain
self-regulated motion, or change; and nature does all things by her
own hands, and does not leave another to baptise her, but baptises
herself; and this through the metamorphosis again.  I remember that a
certain poet described it to me thus:

        Genius is the activity which repairs the decays of things,
whether wholly or partly of a material and finite kind.  Nature,
through all her kingdoms, insures herself.  Nobody cares for planting
the poor fungus: so she shakes down from the gills of one agaric
countless spores, any one of which, being preserved, transmits new
billions of spores to-morrow or next day.  The new agaric of this
hour has a chance which the old one had not.  This atom of seed is
thrown into a new place, not subject to the accidents which destroyed
its parent two rods off.  She makes a man; and having brought him to
ripe age, she will no longer run the risk of losing this wonder at a
blow, but she detaches from him a new self, that the kind may be safe
from accidents to which the individual is exposed.  So when the soul
of the poet has come to ripeness of thought, she detaches and sends
away from it its poems or songs, -- a fearless, sleepless, deathless
progeny, which is not exposed to the accidents of the weary kingdom
of time: a fearless, vivacious offspring, clad with wings (such was
the virtue of the soul out of which they came), which carry them fast
and far, and infix them irrecoverably into the hearts of men.  These
wings are the beauty of the poet's soul.  The songs, thus flying
immortal from their mortal parent, are pursued by clamorous flights
of censures, which swarm in far greater numbers, and threaten to
devour them; but these last are not winged.  At the end of a very
short leap they fall plump down, and rot, having received from the
souls out of which they came no beautiful wings.  But the melodies of
the poet ascend, and leap, and pierce into the deeps of infinite
time.

        So far the bard taught me, using his freer speech.  But nature
has a higher end, in the production of new individuals, than
security, namely, _ascension_, or, the passage of the soul into
higher forms.  I knew, in my younger days, the sculptor who made the
statue of the youth which stands in the public garden.  He was, as I
remember, unable to tell directly, what made him happy, or unhappy,
but by wonderful indirections he could tell.  He rose one day,
according to his habit, before the dawn, and saw the morning break,
grand as the eternity out of which it came, and, for many days after,
he strove to express this tranquillity, and, lo! his chisel had
fashioned out of marble the form of a beautiful youth, Phosphorus,
whose aspect is such, that, it is said, all persons who look on it
become silent.  The poet also resigns himself to his mood, and that
thought which agitated him is expressed, but _alter idem_, in a
manner totally new.  The expression is organic, or, the new type
which things themselves take when liberated.  As, in the sun, objects
paint their images on the retina of the eye, so they, sharing the
aspiration of the whole universe, tend to paint a far more delicate
copy of their essence in his mind.  Like the metamorphosis of things
into higher organic forms, is their change into melodies.  Over
everything stands its daemon, or soul, and, as the form of the thing
is reflected by the eye, so the soul of the thing is reflected by a
melody.  The sea, the mountain-ridge, Niagara, and every flower-bed,
pre-exist, or super-exist, in pre-cantations, which sail like odors
in the air, and when any man goes by with an ear sufficiently fine,
he overhears them, and endeavors to write down the notes, without
diluting or depraving them.  And herein is the legitimation of
criticism, in the mind's faith, that the poems are a corrupt version
of some text in nature, with which they ought to be made to tally.  A
rhyme in one of our sonnets should not be less pleasing than the
iterated nodes of a sea-shell, or the resembling difference of a
group of flowers.  The pairing of the birds is an idyl, not tedious
as our idyls are; a tempest is a rough ode, without falsehood or
rant: a summer, with its harvest sown, reaped, and stored, is an epic
song, subordinating how many admirably executed parts.  Why should
not the symmetry and truth that modulate these, glide into our
spirits, and we participate the invention of nature?

        This insight, which expresses itself by what is called
Imagination, is a very high sort of seeing, which does not come by
study, but by the intellect being where and what it sees, by sharing
the path, or circuit of things through forms, and so making them
translucid to others.  The path of things is silent.  Will they
suffer a speaker to go with them?  A spy they will not suffer; a
lover, a poet, is the transcendency of their own nature, -- him they
will suffer.  The condition of true naming, on the poet's part, is
his resigning himself to the divine _aura_ which breathes through
forms, and accompanying that.

        It is a secret which every intellectual man quickly learns,
that, beyond the energy of his possessed and conscious intellect, he
is capable of a new energy (as of an intellect doubled on itself), by
abandonment to the nature of things; that, beside his privacy of
power as an individual man, there is a great public power, on which
he can draw, by unlocking, at all risks, his human doors, and
suffering the ethereal tides to roll and circulate through him: then
he is caught up into the life of the Universe, his speech is thunder,
his thought is law, and his words are universally intelligible as the
plants and animals.  The poet knows that he speaks adequately, then,
only when he speaks somewhat wildly, or, "with the flower of the
mind;" not with the intellect, used as an organ, but with the
intellect released from all service, and suffered to take its
direction from its celestial life; or, as the ancients were wont to
express themselves, not with intellect alone, but with the intellect
inebriated by nectar.  As the traveller who has lost his way, throws
his reins on his horse's neck, and trusts to the instinct of the
animal to find his road, so must we do with the divine animal who
carries us through this world.  For if in any manner we can stimulate
this instinct, new passages are opened for us into nature, the mind
flows into and through things hardest and highest, and the
metamorphosis is possible.

        This is the reason why bards love wine, mead, narcotics,
coffee, tea, opium, the fumes of sandal-wood and tobacco, or whatever
other species of animal exhilaration.  All men avail themselves of
such means as they can, to add this extraordinary power to their
normal powers; and to this end they prize conversation, music,
pictures, sculpture, dancing, theatres, travelling, war, mobs, fires,
gaming, politics, or love, or science, or animal intoxication, which
are several coarser or finer _quasi_-mechanical substitutes for the
true nectar, which is the ravishment of the intellect by coming
nearer to the fact.  These are auxiliaries to the centrifugal
tendency of a man, to his passage out into free space, and they help
him to escape the custody of that body in which he is pent up, and of
that jail-yard of individual relations in which he is enclosed.
Hence a great number of such as were professionally expressors of
Beauty, as painters, poets, musicians, and actors, have been more
than others wont to lead a life of pleasure and indulgence; all but
the few who received the true nectar; and, as it was a spurious mode
of attaining freedom, as it was an emancipation not into the heavens,
but into the freedom of baser places, they were punished for that
advantage they won, by a dissipation and deterioration.  But never
can any advantage be taken of nature by a trick.  The spirit of the
world, the great calm presence of the creator, comes not forth to the
sorceries of opium or of wine.  The sublime vision comes to the pure
and simple soul in a clean and chaste body.  That is not an
inspiration which we owe to narcotics, but some counterfeit
excitement and fury.  Milton says, that the lyric poet may drink wine
and live generously, but the epic poet, he who shall sing of the
gods, and their descent unto men, must drink water out of a wooden
bowl.  For poetry is not `Devil's wine,' but God's wine.  It is with
this as it is with toys.  We fill the hands and nurseries of our
children with all manner of dolls, drums, and horses, withdrawing
their eyes from the plain face and sufficing objects of nature, the
sun, and moon, the animals, the water, and stones, which should be
their toys.  So the poet's habit of living should be set on a key so
low and plain, that the common influences should delight him.  His
cheerfulness should be the gift of the sunlight; the air should
suffice for his inspiration, and he should be tipsy with water.  That
spirit which suffices quiet hearts, which seems to come forth to such
from every dry knoll of sere grass, from every pine-stump, and
half-imbedded stone, on which the dull March sun shines, comes forth
to the poor and hungry, and such as are of simple taste.  If thou
fill thy brain with Boston and New York, with fashion and
covetousness, and wilt stimulate thy jaded senses with wine and
French coffee, thou shalt find no radiance of wisdom in the lonely
waste of the pinewoods.

        If the imagination intoxicates the poet, it is not inactive in
other men.  The metamorphosis excites in the beholder an emotion of
joy.  The use of symbols has a certain power of emancipation and
exhilaration for all men.  We seem to be touched by a wand, which
makes us dance and run about happily, like children.  We are like
persons who come out of a cave or cellar into the open air.  This is
the effect on us of tropes, fables, oracles, and all poetic forms.
Poets are thus liberating gods.  Men have really got a new sense, and
found within their world, another world, or nest of worlds; for, the
metamorphosis once seen, we divine that it does not stop.  I will not
now consider how much this makes the charm of algebra and the
mathematics, which also have their tropes, but it is felt in every
definition; as, when Aristotle defines _space_ to be an immovable
vessel, in which things are contained; -- or, when Plato defines a
_line_ to be a flowing point; or, _figure_ to be a bound of solid;
and many the like.  What a joyful sense of freedom we have, when
Vitruvius announces the old opinion of artists, that no architect can
build any house well, who does not know something of anatomy.  When
Socrates, in Charmides, tells us that the soul is cured of its
maladies by certain incantations, and that these incantations are
beautiful reasons, from which temperance is generated in souls; when
Plato calls the world an animal; and Timaeus affirms that the plants
also are animals; or affirms a man to be a heavenly tree, growing
with his root, which is his head, upward; and, as George Chapman,
following him, writes, --

        "So in our tree of man, whose nervie root
        Springs in his top;"
 
        when Orpheus speaks of hoariness as "that white flower which
marks extreme old age;" when Proclus calls the universe the statue of
the intellect; when Chaucer, in his praise of `Gentilesse,' compares
good blood in mean condition to fire, which, though carried to the
darkest house betwixt this and the mount of Caucasus, will yet hold
its natural office, and burn as bright as if twenty thousand men did
it behold; when John saw, in the apocalypse, the ruin of the world
through evil, and the stars fall from heaven, as the figtree casteth
her untimely fruit; when Aesop reports the whole catalogue of common
daily relations through the masquerade of birds and beasts; -- we
take the cheerful hint of the immortality of our essence, and its
versatile habit and escapes, as when the gypsies say, "it is in vain
to hang them, they cannot die."

        The poets are thus liberating gods.  The ancient British bards
had for the title of their order, "Those who are free throughout the
world." They are free, and they make free.  An imaginative book
renders us much more service at first, by stimulating us through its
tropes, than afterward, when we arrive at the precise sense of the
author.  I think nothing is of any value in books, excepting the
transcendental and extraordinary.  If a man is inflamed and carried
away by his thought, to that degree that he forgets the authors and
the public, and heeds only this one dream, which holds him like an
insanity, let me read his paper, and you may have all the arguments
and histories and criticism.  All the value which attaches to
Pythagoras, Paracelsus, Cornelius Agrippa, Cardan, Kepler,
Swedenborg, Schelling, Oken, or any other who introduces questionable
facts into his cosmogony, as angels, devils, magic, astrology,
palmistry, mesmerism, and so on, is the certificate we have of
departure from routine, and that here is a new witness.  That also is
the best success in conversation, the magic of liberty, which puts
the world, like a ball, in our hands.  How cheap even the liberty
then seems; how mean to study, when an emotion communicates to the
intellect the power to sap and upheave nature: how great the
perspective! nations, times, systems, enter and disappear, like
threads in tapestry of large figure and many colors; dream delivers
us to dream, and, while the drunkenness lasts, we will sell our bed,
our philosophy, our religion, in our opulence.

        There is good reason why we should prize this liberation.  The
fate of the poor shepherd, who, blinded and lost in the snow-storm,
perishes in a drift within a few feet of his cottage door, is an
emblem of the state of man.  On the brink of the waters of life and
truth, we are miserably dying.  The inaccessibleness of every thought
but that we are in, is wonderful.  What if you come near to it, --
you are as remote, when you are nearest, as when you are farthest.
Every thought is also a prison; every heaven is also a prison.
Therefore we love the poet, the inventor, who in any form, whether in
an ode, or in an action, or in looks and behavior, has yielded us a
new thought.  He unlocks our chains, and admits us to a new scene.

        This emancipation is dear to all men, and the power to impart
it, as it must come from greater depth and scope of thought, is a
measure of intellect.  Therefore all books of the imagination endure,
all which ascend to that truth, that the writer sees nature beneath
him, and uses it as his exponent.  Every verse or sentence,
possessing this virtue, will take care of its own immortality.  The
religions of the world are the ejaculations of a few imaginative men.

        But the quality of the imagination is to flow, and not to
freeze.  The poet did not stop at the color, or the form, but read
their meaning; neither may he rest in this meaning, but he makes the
same objects exponents of his new thought.  Here is the difference
betwixt the poet and the mystic, that the last nails a symbol to one
sense, which was a true sense for a moment, but soon becomes old and
false.  For all symbols are fluxional; all language is vehicular and
transitive, and is good, as ferries and horses are, for conveyance,
not as farms and houses are, for homestead.  Mysticism consists in
the mistake of an accidental and individual symbol for an universal
one.  The morning-redness happens to be the favorite meteor to the
eyes of Jacob Behmen, and comes to stand to him for truth and faith;
and he believes should stand for the same realities to every reader.
But the first reader prefers as naturally the symbol of a mother and
child, or a gardener and his bulb, or a jeweller polishing a gem.
Either of these, or of a myriad more, are equally good to the person
to whom they are significant.  Only they must be held lightly, and be
very willingly translated into the equivalent terms which others use.
And the mystic must be steadily told, -- All that you say is just as
true without the tedious use of that symbol as with it.  Let us have
a little algebra, instead of this trite rhetoric, -- universal signs,
instead of these village symbols, -- and we shall both be gainers.
The history of hierarchies seems to show, that all religious error
consisted in making the symbol too stark and solid, and, at last,
nothing but an excess of the organ of language.

        Swedenborg, of all men in the recent ages, stands eminently for
the translator of nature into thought.  I do not know the man in
history to whom things stood so uniformly for words.  Before him the
metamorphosis continually plays.  Everything on which his eye rests,
obeys the impulses of moral nature.  The figs become grapes whilst he
eats them.  When some of his angels affirmed a truth, the laurel twig
which they held blossomed in their hands.  The noise which, at a
distance, appeared like gnashing and thumping, on coming nearer was
found to be the voice of disputants.  The men, in one of his visions,
seen in heavenly light, appeared like dragons, and seemed in
darkness: but, to each other, they appeared as men, and, when the
light from heaven shone into their cabin, they complained of the
darkness, and were compelled to shut the window that they might see.

        There was this perception in him, which makes the poet or seer,
an object of awe and terror, namely, that the same man, or society of
men, may wear one aspect to themselves and their companions, and a
different aspect to higher intelligences.  Certain priests, whom he
describes as conversing very learnedly together, appeared to the
children, who were at some distance, like dead horses: and many the
like misappearances.  And instantly the mind inquires, whether these
fishes under the bridge, yonder oxen in the pasture, those dogs in
the yard, are immutably fishes, oxen, and dogs, or only so appear to
me, and perchance to themselves appear upright men; and whether I
appear as a man to all eyes.  The Bramins and Pythagoras propounded
the same question, and if any poet has witnessed the transformation,
he doubtless found it in harmony with various experiences.  We have
all seen changes as considerable in wheat and caterpillars.  He is
the poet, and shall draw us with love and terror, who sees, through
the flowing vest, the firm nature, and can declare it.

        I look in vain for the poet whom I describe.  We do not, with
sufficient plainness, or sufficient profoundness, address ourselves
to life, nor dare we chaunt our own times and social circumstance.
If we filled the day with bravery, we should not shrink from
celebrating it.  Time and nature yield us many gifts, but not yet the
timely man, the new religion, the reconciler, whom all things await.
Dante's praise is, that he dared to write his autobiography in
colossal cipher, or into universality.  We have yet had no genius in
America, with tyrannous eye, which knew the value of our incomparable
materials, and saw, in the barbarism and materialism of the times,
another carnival of the same gods whose picture he so much admires in
Homer; then in the middle age; then in Calvinism.  Banks and tariffs,
the newspaper and caucus, methodism and unitarianism, are flat and
dull to dull people, but rest on the same foundations of wonder as
the town of Troy, and the temple of Delphos, and are as swiftly
passing away.  Our logrolling, our stumps and their politics, our
fisheries, our Negroes, and Indians, our boasts, and our
repudiations, the wrath of rogues, and the pusillanimity of honest
men, the northern trade, the southern planting, the western clearing,
Oregon, and Texas, are yet unsung.  Yet America is a poem in our
eyes; its ample geography dazzles the imagination, and it will not
wait long for metres.  If I have not found that excellent combination
of gifts in my countrymen which I seek, neither could I aid myself to
fix the idea of the poet by reading now and then in Chalmers's
collection of five centuries of English poets.  These are wits, more
than poets, though there have been poets among them.  But when we
adhere to the ideal of the poet, we have our difficulties even with
Milton and Homer.  Milton is too literary, and Homer too literal and
historical.

        But I am not wise enough for a national criticism, and must use
the old largeness a little longer, to discharge my errand from the
muse to the poet concerning his art.

        Art is the path of the creator to his work.  The paths, or
methods, are ideal and eternal, though few men ever see them, not the
artist himself for years, or for a lifetime, unless he come into the
conditions.  The painter, the sculptor, the composer, the epic
rhapsodist, the orator, all partake one desire, namely, to express
themselves symmetrically and abundantly, not dwarfishly and
fragmentarily.  They found or put themselves in certain conditions,
as, the painter and sculptor before some impressive human figures;
the orator, into the assembly of the people; and the others, in such
scenes as each has found exciting to his intellect; and each
presently feels the new desire.  He hears a voice, he sees a
beckoning.  Then he is apprised, with wonder, what herds of daemons
hem him in.  He can no more rest; he says, with the old painter, "By
God, it is in me, and must go forth of me." He pursues a beauty, half
seen, which flies before him.  The poet pours out verses in every
solitude.  Most of the things he says are conventional, no doubt; but
by and by he says something which is original and beautiful.  That
charms him.  He would say nothing else but such things.  In our way
of talking, we say, `That is yours, this is mine;' but the poet knows
well that it is not his; that it is as strange and beautiful to him
as to you; he would fain hear the like eloquence at length.  Once
having tasted this immortal ichor, he cannot have enough of it, and,
as an admirable creative power exists in these intellections, it is
of the last importance that these things get spoken.  What a little
of all we know is said!  What drops of all the sea of our science are
baled up! and by what accident it is that these are exposed, when so
many secrets sleep in nature!  Hence the necessity of speech and
song; hence these throbs and heart-beatings in the orator, at the
door of the assembly, to the end, namely, that thought may be
ejaculated as Logos, or Word.

        Doubt not, O poet, but persist.  Say, `It is in me, and shall
out.' Stand there, baulked and dumb, stuttering and stammering,
hissed and hooted, stand and strive, until, at last, rage draw out of
thee that _dream_-power which every night shows thee is thine own; a
power transcending all limit and privacy, and by virtue of which a
man is the conductor of the whole river of electricity.  Nothing
walks, or creeps, or grows, or exists, which must not in turn arise
and walk before him as exponent of his meaning.  Comes he to that
power, his genius is no longer exhaustible.  All the creatures, by
pairs and by tribes, pour into his mind as into a Noah's ark, to come
forth again to people a new world.  This is like the stock of air for
our respiration, or for the combustion of our fireplace, not a
measure of gallons, but the entire atmosphere if wanted.  And
therefore the rich poets, as Homer, Chaucer, Shakspeare, and Raphael,
have obviously no limits to their works, except the limits of their
lifetime, and resemble a mirror carried through the street, ready to
render an image of every created thing.

        O poet! a new nobility is conferred in groves and pastures, and
not in castles, or by the sword-blade, any longer.  The conditions
are hard, but equal.  Thou shalt leave the world, and know the muse
only.  Thou shalt not know any longer the times, customs, graces,
politics, or opinions of men, but shalt take all from the muse.  For
the time of towns is tolled from the world by funereal chimes, but in
nature the universal hours are counted by succeeding tribes of
animals and plants, and by growth of joy on joy.  God wills also that
thou abdicate a manifold and duplex life, and that thou be content
that others speak for thee.  Others shall be thy gentlemen, and shall
represent all courtesy and worldly life for thee; others shall do the
great and resounding actions also.  Thou shalt lie close hid with
nature, and canst not be afforded to the Capitol or the Exchange.
The world is full of renunciations and apprenticeships, and this is
thine: thou must pass for a fool and a churl for a long season.  This
is the screen and sheath in which Pan has protected his well-beloved
flower, and thou shalt be known only to thine own, and they shall
console thee with tenderest love.  And thou shalt not be able to
rehearse the names of thy friends in thy verse, for an old shame
before the holy ideal.  And this is the reward: that the ideal shall
be real to thee, and the impressions of the actual world shall fall
like summer rain, copious, but not troublesome, to thy invulnerable
essence.  Thou shalt have the whole land for thy park and manor, the
sea for thy bath and navigation, without tax and without envy; the
woods and the rivers thou shalt own; and thou shalt possess that
wherein others are only tenants and boarders.  Thou true land-lord!
sea-lord! air-lord!  Wherever snow falls, or water flows, or birds
fly, wherever day and night meet in twilight, wherever the blue
heaven is hung by clouds, or sown with stars, wherever are forms with
transparent boundaries, wherever are outlets into celestial space,
wherever is danger, and awe, and love, there is Beauty, plenteous as
rain, shed for thee, and though thou shouldest walk the world over,
thou shalt not be able to find a condition inopportune or ignoble.

 
 
        EXPERIENCE
 
 
        The lords of life, the lords of life,---
        I saw them pass,
        In their own guise,
        Like and unlike,
        Portly and grim,
        Use and Surprise,
        Surface and Dream,
        Succession swift, and spectral Wrong,
        Temperament without a tongue,
        And the inventor of the game
        Omnipresent without name; --
        Some to see, some to be guessed,
        They marched from east to west:
        Little man, least of all,
        Among the legs of his guardians tall,
        Walked about with puzzled look: --
        Him by the hand dear nature took;
        Dearest nature, strong and kind,
        Whispered, `Darling, never mind!
        Tomorrow they will wear another face,
        The founder thou! these are thy race!'

 
 
        ESSAY II _Experience_

        Where do we find ourselves?  In a series of which we do not
know the extremes, and believe that it has none.  We wake and find
ourselves on a stair; there are stairs below us, which we seem to
have ascended; there are stairs above us, many a one, which go upward
and out of sight.  But the Genius which, according to the old belief,
stands at the door by which we enter, and gives us the lethe to
drink, that we may tell no tales, mixed the cup too strongly, and we
cannot shake off the lethargy now at noonday.  Sleep lingers all our
lifetime about our eyes, as night hovers all day in the boughs of the
fir-tree.  All things swim and glitter.  Our life is not so much
threatened as our perception.  Ghostlike we glide through nature, and
should not know our place again.  Did our birth fall in some fit of
indigence and frugality in nature, that she was so sparing of her
fire and so liberal of her earth, that it appears to us that we lack
the affirmative principle, and though we have health and reason, yet
we have no superfluity of spirit for new creation?  We have enough to
live and bring the year about, but not an ounce to impart or to
invest.  Ah that our Genius were a little more of a genius!  We are
like millers on the lower levels of a stream, when the factories
above them have exhausted the water.  We too fancy that the upper
people must have raised their dams.

        If any of us knew what we were doing, or where we are going,
then when we think we best know!  We do not know today whether we are
busy or idle.  In times when we thought ourselves indolent, we have
afterwards discovered, that much was accomplished, and much was begun
in us.  All our days are so unprofitable while they pass, that 'tis
wonderful where or when we ever got anything of this which we call
wisdom, poetry, virtue.  We never got it on any dated calendar day.
Some heavenly days must have been intercalated somewhere, like those
that Hermes won with dice of the Moon, that Osiris might be born.  It
is said, all martyrdoms looked mean when they were suffered.  Every
ship is a romantic object, except that we sail in.  Embark, and the
romance quits our vessel, and hangs on every other sail in the
horizon.  Our life looks trivial, and we shun to record it.  Men seem
to have learned of the horizon the art of perpetual retreating and
reference.  `Yonder uplands are rich pasturage, and my neighbor has
fertile meadow, but my field,' says the querulous farmer, `only holds
the world together.' I quote another man's saying; unluckily, that
other withdraws himself in the same way, and quotes me.  'Tis the
trick of nature thus to degrade today; a good deal of buzz, and
somewhere a result slipped magically in.  Every roof is agreeable to
the eye, until it is lifted; then we find tragedy and moaning women,
and hard-eyed husbands, and deluges of lethe, and the men ask,
`What's the news?' as if the old were so bad.  How many individuals
can we count in society? how many actions? how many opinions?  So
much of our time is preparation, so much is routine, and so much
retrospect, that the pith of each man's genius contracts itself to a
very few hours.  The history of literature -- take the net result of
Tiraboschi, Warton, or Schlegel, -- is a sum of very few ideas, and
of very few original tales, -- all the rest being variation of these.
So in this great society wide lying around us, a critical analysis
would find very few spontaneous actions.  It is almost all custom and
gross sense.  There are even few opinions, and these seem organic in
the speakers, and do not disturb the universal necessity.

        What opium is instilled into all disaster!  It shows formidable
as we approach it, but there is at last no rough rasping friction,
but the most slippery sliding surfaces.  We fall soft on a thought.
_Ate Dea_ is gentle,

        "Over men's heads walking aloft,
        With tender feet treading so soft."
 
        People grieve and bemoan themselves, but it is not half so bad
with them as they say.  There are moods in which we court suffering,
in the hope that here, at least, we shall find reality, sharp peaks
and edges of truth.  But it turns out to be scene-painting and
counterfeit.  The only thing grief has taught me, is to know how
shallow it is.  That, like all the rest, plays about the surface, and
never introduces me into the reality, for contact with which, we
would even pay the costly price of sons and lovers.  Was it Boscovich
who found out that bodies never come in contact?  Well, souls never
touch their objects.  An innavigable sea washes with silent waves
between us and the things we aim at and converse with.  Grief too
will make us idealists.  In the death of my son, now more than two
years ago, I seem to have lost a beautiful estate, -- no more.  I
cannot get it nearer to me.  If tomorrow I should be informed of the
bankruptcy of my principal debtors, the loss of my property would be
a great inconvenience to me, perhaps, for many years; but it would
leave me as it found me, -- neither better nor worse.  So is it with
this calamity: it does not touch me: some thing which I fancied was a
part of me, which could not be torn away without tearing me, nor
enlarged without enriching me, falls off from me, and leaves no scar.
It was caducous.  I grieve that grief can teach me nothing, nor carry
me one step into real nature.  The Indian who was laid under a curse,
that the wind should not blow on him, nor water flow to him, nor fire
burn him, is a type of us all.  The dearest events are summer-rain,
and we the Para coats that shed every drop.  Nothing is left us now
but death.  We look to that with a grim satisfaction, saying, there
at least is reality that will not dodge us.

        I take this evanescence and lubricity of all objects, which
lets them slip through our fingers then when we clutch hardest, to be
the most unhandsome part of our condition.  Nature does not like to
be observed, and likes that we should be her fools and playmates.  We
may have the sphere for our cricket-ball, but not a berry for our
philosophy.  Direct strokes she never gave us power to make; all our
blows glance, all our hits are accidents.  Our relations to each
other are oblique and casual.

        Dream delivers us to dream, and there is no end to illusion.
Life is a train of moods like a string of beads, and, as we pass
through them, they prove to be many-colored lenses which paint the
world their own hue, and each shows only what lies in its focus.
From the mountain you see the mountain.  We animate what we can, and
we see only what we animate.  Nature and books belong to the eyes
that see them.  It depends on the mood of the man, whether he shall
see the sunset or the fine poem.  There are always sunsets, and there
is always genius; but only a few hours so serene that we can relish
nature or criticism.  The more or less depends on structure or
temperament.  Temperament is the iron wire on which the beads are
strung.  Of what use is fortune or talent to a cold and defective
nature?  Who cares what sensibility or discrimination a man has at
some time shown, if he falls asleep in his chair? or if he laugh and
giggle? or if he apologize? or is affected with egotism? or thinks of
his dollar? or cannot go by food? or has gotten a child in his
boyhood?  Of what use is genius, if the organ is too convex or too
concave, and cannot find a focal distance within the actual horizon
of human life?  Of what use, if the brain is too cold or too hot, and
the man does not care enough for results, to stimulate him to
experiment, and hold him up in it? or if the web is too finely woven,
too irritable by pleasure and pain, so that life stagnates from too
much reception, without due outlet?  Of what use to make heroic vows
of amendment, if the same old law-breaker is to keep them?  What
cheer can the religious sentiment yield, when that is suspected to be
secretly dependent on the seasons of the year, and the state of the
blood?  I knew a witty physician who found theology in the biliary
duct, and used to affirm that if there was disease in the liver, the
man became a Calvinist, and if that organ was sound, he became a
Unitarian.  Very mortifying is the reluctant experience that some
unfriendly excess or imbecility neutralizes the promise of genius.
We see young men who owe us a new world, so readily and lavishly they
promise, but they never acquit the debt; they die young and dodge the
account: or if they live, they lose themselves in the crowd.

        Temperament also enters fully into the system of illusions, and
shuts us in a prison of glass which we cannot see.  There is an
optical illusion about every person we meet.  In truth, they are all
creatures of given temperament, which will appear in a given
character, whose boundaries they will never pass: but we look at
them, they seem alive, and we presume there is impulse in them.  In
the moment it seems impulse; in the year, in the lifetime, it turns
out to be a certain uniform tune which the revolving barrel of the
music-box must play.  Men resist the conclusion in the morning, but
adopt it as the evening wears on, that temper prevails over
everything of time, place, and condition, and is inconsumable in the
flames of religion.  Some modifications the moral sentiment avails to
impose, but the individual texture holds its dominion, if not to bias
the moral judgments, yet to fix the measure of activity and of
enjoyment.

        I thus express the law as it is read from the platform of
ordinary life, but must not leave it without noticing the capital
exception.  For temperament is a power which no man willingly hears
any one praise but himself.  On the platform of physics, we cannot
resist the contracting influences of so-called science.  Temperament
puts all divinity to rout.  I know the mental proclivity of
physicians.  I hear the chuckle of the phrenologists.  Theoretic
kidnappers and slave-drivers, they esteem each man the victim of
another, who winds him round his finger by knowing the law of his
being, and by such cheap signboards as the color of his beard, or the
slope of his occiput, reads the inventory of his fortunes and
character.  The grossest ignorance does not disgust like this
impudent knowingness.  The physicians say, they are not materialists;
but they are: -- Spirit is matter reduced to an extreme thinness: O
_so_ thin! -- But the definition of _spiritual_ should be, _that
which is its own evidence._ What notions do they attach to love! what
to religion!  One would not willingly pronounce these words in their
hearing, and give them the occasion to profane them.  I saw a
gracious gentleman who adapts his conversation to the form of the
head of the man he talks with!  I had fancied that the value of life
lay in its inscrutable possibilities; in the fact that I never know,
in addressing myself to a new individual, what may befall me.  I
carry the keys of my castle in my hand, ready to throw them at the
feet of my lord, whenever and in what disguise soever he shall
appear.  I know he is in the neighborhood hidden among vagabonds.
Shall I preclude my future, by taking a high seat, and kindly
adapting my conversation to the shape of heads?  When I come to that,
the doctors shall buy me for a cent.---- `But, sir, medical history;
the report to the Institute; the proven facts!' -- I distrust the
facts and the inferences.  Temperament is the veto or
limitation-power in the constitution, very justly applied to restrain
an opposite excess in the constitution, but absurdly offered as a bar
to original equity.  When virtue is in presence, all subordinate
powers sleep.  On its own level, or in view of nature, temperament is
final.  I see not, if one be once caught in this trap of so-called
sciences, any escape for the man from the links of the chain of
physical necessity.  Given such an embryo, such a history must
follow.  On this platform, one lives in a sty of sensualism, and
would soon come to suicide.  But it is impossible that the creative
power should exclude itself.  Into every intelligence there is a door
which is never closed, through which the creator passes.  The
intellect, seeker of absolute truth, or the heart, lover of absolute
good, intervenes for our succor, and at one whisper of these high
powers, we awake from ineffectual struggles with this nightmare.  We
hurl it into its own hell, and cannot again contract ourselves to so
base a state.

        The secret of the illusoriness is in the necessity of a
succession of moods or objects.  Gladly we would anchor, but the
anchorage is quicksand.  This onward trick of nature is too strong
for us: _Pero si muove._ When, at night, I look at the moon and
stars, I seem stationary, and they to hurry.  Our love of the real
draws us to permanence, but health of body consists in circulation,
and sanity of mind in variety or facility of association.  We need
change of objects.  Dedication to one thought is quickly odious.  We
house with the insane, and must humor them; then conversation dies
out.  Once I took such delight in Montaigne, that I thought I should
not need any other book; before that, in Shakspeare; then in
Plutarch; then in Plotinus; at one time in Bacon; afterwards in
Goethe; even in Bettine; but now I turn the pages of either of them
languidly, whilst I still cherish their genius.  So with pictures;
each will bear an emphasis of attention once, which it cannot retain,
though we fain would continue to be pleased in that manner.  How
strongly I have felt of pictures, that when you have seen one well,
you must take your leave of it; you shall never see it again.  I have
had good lessons from pictures, which I have since seen without
emotion or remark.  A deduction must be made from the opinion, which
even the wise express of a new book or occurrence.  Their opinion
gives me tidings of their mood, and some vague guess at the new fact
but is nowise to be trusted as the lasting relation between that
intellect and that thing.  The child asks, `Mamma, why don't I like
the story as well as when you told it me yesterday?' Alas, child, it
is even so with the oldest cherubim of knowledge.  But will it answer
thy question to say, Because thou wert born to a whole, and this
story is a particular?  The reason of the pain this discovery causes
us (and we make it late in respect to works of art and intellect), is
the plaint of tragedy which murmurs from it in regard to persons, to
friendship and love.

        That immobility and absence of elasticity which we find in the
arts, we find with more pain in the artist.  There is no power of
expansion in men.  Our friends early appear to us as representatives
of certain ideas, which they never pass or exceed.  They stand on the
brink of the ocean of thought and power, but they never take the
single step that would bring them there.  A man is like a bit of
Labrador spar, which has no lustre as you turn it in your hand, until
you come to a particular angle; then it shows deep and beautiful
colors.  There is no adaptation or universal applicability in men,
but each has his special talent, and the mastery of successful men
consists in adroitly keeping themselves where and when that turn
shall be oftenest to be practised.  We do what we must, and call it
by the best names we can, and would fain have the praise of having
intended the result which ensues.  I cannot recall any form of man
who is not superfluous sometimes.  But is not this pitiful?  Life is
not worth the taking, to do tricks in.

        Of course, it needs the whole society, to give the symmetry we
seek.  The parti-colored wheel must revolve very fast to appear
white.  Something is learned too by conversing with so much folly and
defect.  In fine, whoever loses, we are always of the gaining party.
Divinity is behind our failures and follies also.  The plays of
children are nonsense, but very educative nonsense.  So it is with
the largest and solemnest things, with commerce, government, church,
marriage, and so with the history of every man's bread, and the ways
by which he is to come by it.  Like a bird which alights nowhere, but
hops perpetually from bough to bough, is the Power which abides in no
man and in no woman, but for a moment speaks from this one, and for
another moment from that one.

 
        But what help from these fineries or pedantries?  What help
from thought?  Life is not dialectics.  We, I think, in these times,
have had lessons enough of the futility of criticism.  Our young
people have thought and written much on labor and reform, and for all
that they have written, neither the world nor themselves have got on
a step.  Intellectual tasting of life will not supersede muscular
activity.  If a man should consider the nicety of the passage of a
piece of bread down his throat, he would starve.  At Education-Farm,
the noblest theory of life sat on the noblest figures of young men
and maidens, quite powerless and melancholy.  It would not rake or
pitch a ton of hay; it would not rub down a horse; and the men and
maidens it left pale and hungry.  A political orator wittily compared
our party promises to western roads, which opened stately enough,
with planted trees on either side, to tempt the traveller, but soon
became narrow and narrower, and ended in a squirrel-track, and ran up
a tree.  So does culture with us; it ends in head-ache.  Unspeakably
sad and barren does life look to those, who a few months ago were
dazzled with the splendor of the promise of the times.  "There is now
no longer any right course of action, nor any self-devotion left
among the Iranis." Objections and criticism we have had our fill of.
There are objections to every course of life and action, and the
practical wisdom infers an indifferency, from the omnipresence of
objection.  The whole frame of things preaches indifferency.  Do not
craze yourself with thinking, but go about your business anywhere.
Life is not intellectual or critical, but sturdy.  Its chief good is
for well-mixed people who can enjoy what they find, without question.
Nature hates peeping, and our mothers speak her very sense when they
say, "Children, eat your victuals, and say no more of it." To fill
the hour, -- that is happiness; to fill the hour, and leave no
crevice for a repentance or an approval.  We live amid surfaces, and
the true art of life is to skate well on them.  Under the oldest
mouldiest conventions, a man of native force prospers just as well as
in the newest world, and that by skill of handling and treatment.  He
can take hold anywhere.  Life itself is a mixture of power and form,
and will not bear the least excess of either.  To finish the moment,
to find the journey's end in every step of the road, to live the
greatest number of good hours, is wisdom.  It is not the part of men,
but of fanatics, or of mathematicians, if you will, to say, that, the
shortness of life considered, it is not worth caring whether for so
short a duration we were sprawling in want, or sitting high.  Since
our office is with moments, let us husband them.  Five minutes of
today are worth as much to me, as five minutes in the next
millennium.  Let us be poised, and wise, and our own, today.  Let us
treat the men and women well: treat them as if they were real:
perhaps they are.  Men live in their fancy, like drunkards whose
hands are too soft and tremulous for successful labor.  It is a
tempest of fancies, and the only ballast I know, is a respect to the
present hour.  Without any shadow of doubt, amidst this vertigo of
shows and politics, I settle myself ever the firmer in the creed,
that we should not postpone and refer and wish, but do broad justice
where we are, by whomsoever we deal with, accepting our actual
companions and circumstances, however humble or odious, as the mystic
officials to whom the universe has delegated its whole pleasure for
us.  If these are mean and malignant, their contentment, which is the
last victory of justice, is a more satisfying echo to the heart, than
the voice of poets and the casual sympathy of admirable persons.  I
think that however a thoughtful man may suffer from the defects and
absurdities of his company, he cannot without affectation deny to any
set of men and women, a sensibility to extraordinary merit.  The
coarse and frivolous have an instinct of superiority, if they have
not a sympathy, and honor it in their blind capricious way with
sincere homage.

        The fine young people despise life, but in me, and in such as
with me are free from dyspepsia, and to whom a day is a sound and
solid good, it is a great excess of politeness to look scornful and
to cry for company.  I am grown by sympathy a little eager and
sentimental, but leave me alone, and I should relish every hour and
what it brought me, the pot-luck of the day, as heartily as the
oldest gossip in the bar-room.  I am thankful for small mercies.  I
compared notes with one of my friends who expects everything of the
universe, and is disappointed when anything is less than the best,
and I found that I begin at the other extreme, expecting nothing, and
am always full of thanks for moderate goods.  I accept the clangor
and jangle of contrary tendencies.  I find my account in sots and
bores also.  They give a reality to the circumjacent picture, which
such a vanishing meteorous appearance can ill spare.  In the morning
I awake, and find the old world, wife, babes, and mother, Concord and
Boston, the dear old spiritual world, and even the dear old devil not
far off.  If we will take the good we find, asking no questions, we
shall have heaping measures.  The great gifts are not got by
analysis.  Everything good is on the highway.  The middle region of
our being is the temperate zone.  We may climb into the thin and cold
realm of pure geometry and lifeless science, or sink into that of
sensation.  Between these extremes is the equator of life, of
thought, of spirit, of poetry, -- a narrow belt.  Moreover, in
popular experience, everything good is on the highway.  A collector
peeps into all the picture-shops of Europe, for a landscape of
Poussin, a crayon-sketch of Salvator; but the Transfiguration, the
Last Judgment, the Communion of St. Jerome, and what are as
transcendent as these, are on the walls of the Vatican, the Uffizii,
or the Louvre, where every footman may see them; to say nothing of
nature's pictures in every street, of sunsets and sunrises every day,
and the sculpture of the human body never absent.  A collector
recently bought at public auction, in London, for one hundred and
fifty-seven guineas, an autograph of Shakspeare: but for nothing a
school-boy can read Hamlet, and can detect secrets of highest
concernment yet unpublished therein.  I think I will never read any
but the commonest books, -- the Bible, Homer, Dante, Shakspeare, and
Milton.  Then we are impatient of so public a life and planet, and
run hither and thither for nooks and secrets.  The imagination
delights in the wood-craft of Indians, trappers, and bee-hunters.  We
fancy that we are strangers, and not so intimately domesticated in
the planet as the wild man, and the wild beast and bird.  But the
exclusion reaches them also; reaches the climbing, flying, gliding,
feathered and four-footed man.  Fox and woodchuck, hawk and snipe,
and bittern, when nearly seen, have no more root in the deep world
than man, and are just such superficial tenants of the globe.  Then
the new molecular philosophy shows astronomical interspaces betwixt
atom and atom, shows that the world is all outside: it has no inside.

        The mid-world is best.  Nature, as we know her, is no saint.
The lights of the church, the ascetics, Gentoos and Grahamites, she
does not distinguish by any favor.  She comes eating and drinking and
sinning.  Her darlings, the great, the strong, the beautiful, are not
children of our law, do not come out of the Sunday School, nor weigh
their food, nor punctually keep the commandments.  If we will be
strong with her strength, we must not harbor such disconsolate
consciences, borrowed too from the consciences of other nations.  We
must set up the strong present tense against all the rumors of wrath,
past or to come.  So many things are unsettled which it is of the
first importance to settle, -- and, pending their settlement, we will
do as we do.  Whilst the debate goes forward on the equity of
commerce, and will not be closed for a century or two, New and Old
England may keep shop. Law of copyright and international copyright
is to be discussed, and, in the interim, we will sell our books for
the most we can. Expediency of literature, reason of literature,
lawfulness of writing down a thought, is questioned; much is to say
on both sides, and, while the fight waxes hot, thou, dearest scholar,
stick to thy foolish task, add a line every hour, and between whiles
add a line. Right to hold land, right of property, is disputed, and
the conventions convene, and before the vote is taken, dig away in
your garden, and spend your earnings as a waif or godsend to all
serene and beautiful purposes. Life itself is a bubble and a
skepticism, and a sleep within a sleep.  Grant it, and as much more
as they will, -- but thou, God's darling! heed thy private dream:
thou wilt not be missed in the scorning and skepticism: there are
enough of them: stay there in thy closet, and toil, until the rest
are agreed what to do about it.  Thy sickness, they say, and thy puny
habit, require that thou do this or avoid that, but know that thy
life is a flitting state, a tent for a night, and do thou, sick or
well, finish that stint.  Thou art sick, but shalt not be worse, and
the universe, which holds thee dear, shall be the better.

        Human life is made up of the two elements, power and form, and
the proportion must be invariably kept, if we would have it sweet and
sound.  Each of these elements in excess makes a mischief as hurtful
as its defect.  Everything runs to excess: every good quality is
noxious, if unmixed, and, to carry the danger to the edge of ruin,
nature causes each man's peculiarity to superabound. Here, among the
farms, we adduce the scholars as examples of this treachery.  They
are nature's victims of expression.  You who see the artist, the
orator, the poet, too near, and find their life no more excellent
than that of mechanics or farmers, and themselves victims of
partiality, very hollow and haggard, and pronounce them failures, --
not heroes, but quacks, -- conclude very reasonably, that these arts
are not for man, but are disease.  Yet nature will not bear you out.
Irresistible nature made men such, and makes legions more of such,
every day.  You love the boy reading in a book, gazing at a drawing,
or a cast: yet what are these millions who read and behold, but
incipient writers and sculptors?  Add a little more of that quality
which now reads and sees, and they will seize the pen and chisel.
And if one remembers how innocently he began to be an artist, he
perceives that nature joined with his enemy.  A man is a golden
impossibility.  The line he must walk is a hair's breadth.  The wise
through excess of wisdom is made a fool.

        How easily, if fate would suffer it, we might keep forever
these beautiful limits, and adjust ourselves, once for all, to the
perfect calculation of the kingdom of known cause and effect.  In the
street and in the newspapers, life appears so plain a business, that
manly resolution and adherence to the multiplication-table through
all weathers, will insure success.  But ah! presently comes a day, or
is it only a half-hour, with its angel-whispering, -- which
discomfits the conclusions of nations and of years!  Tomorrow again,
everything looks real and angular, the habitual standards are
reinstated, common sense is as rare as genius, -- is the basis of
genius, and experience is hands and feet to every enterprise; -- and
yet, he who should do his business on this understanding, would be
quickly bankrupt.  Power keeps quite another road than the turnpikes
of choice and will, namely, the subterranean and invisible tunnels
and channels of life.  It is ridiculous that we are diplomatists, and
doctors, and considerate people: there are no dupes like these.  Life
is a series of surprises, and would not be worth taking or keeping,
if it were not.  God delights to isolate us every day, and hide from
us the past and the future.  We would look about us, but with grand
politeness he draws down before us an impenetrable screen of purest
sky, and another behind us of purest sky.  `You will not remember,'
he seems to say, `and you will not expect.' All good conversation,
manners, and action, come from a spontaneity which forgets usages,
and makes the moment great.  Nature hates calculators; her methods
are saltatory and impulsive.  Man lives by pulses; our organic
movements are such; and the chemical and ethereal agents are
undulatory and alternate; and the mind goes antagonizing on, and
never prospers but by fits.  We thrive by casualties.  Our chief
experiences have been casual.  The most attractive class of people
are those who are powerful obliquely, and not by the direct stroke:
men of genius, but not yet accredited: one gets the cheer of their
light, without paying too great a tax.  Theirs is the beauty of the
bird, or the morning light, and not of art.  In the thought of genius
there is always a surprise; and the moral sentiment is well called
"the newness," for it is never other; as new to the oldest
intelligence as to the young child, -- "the kingdom that cometh
without observation." In like manner, for practical success, there
must not be too much design.  A man will not be observed in doing
that which he can do best.  There is a certain magic about his
properest action, which stupefies your powers of observation, so that
though it is done before you, you wist not of it.  The art of life
has a pudency, and will not be exposed.  Every man is an
impossibility, until he is born; every thing impossible, until we see
a success.  The ardors of piety agree at last with the coldest
skepticism, -- that nothing is of us or our works, -- that all is of
God.  Nature will not spare us the smallest leaf of laurel.  All
writing comes by the grace of God, and all doing and having.  I would
gladly be moral, and keep due metes and bounds, which I dearly love,
and allow the most to the will of man, but I have set my heart on
honesty in this chapter, and I can see nothing at last, in success or
failure, than more or less of vital force supplied from the Eternal.
The results of life are uncalculated and uncalculable.  The years
teach much which the days never know.  The persons who compose our
company, converse, and come and go, and design and execute many
things, and somewhat comes of it all, but an unlooked for result.
The individual is always mistaken.  He designed many things, and drew
in other persons as coadjutors, quarrelled with some or all,
blundered much, and something is done; all are a little advanced, but
the individual is always mistaken.  It turns out somewhat new, and
very unlike what he promised himself.

        The ancients, struck with this irreducibleness of the elements
of human life to calculation, exalted Chance into a divinity, but
that is to stay too long at the spark, -- which glitters truly at one
point, -- but the universe is warm with the latency of the same fire.
The miracle of life which will not be expounded, but will remain a
miracle, introduces a new element.  In the growth of the embryo, Sir
Everard Home, I think, noticed that the evolution was not from one
central point, but co-active from three or more points.  Life has no
memory.  That which proceeds in succession might be remembered, but
that which is coexistent, or ejaculated from a deeper cause, as yet
far from being conscious, knows not its own tendency.  So is it with
us, now skeptical, or without unity, because immersed in forms and
effects all seeming to be of equal yet hostile value, and now
religious, whilst in the reception of spiritual law.  Bear with these
distractions, with this coetaneous growth of the parts: they will one
day be _members_, and obey one will.  On that one will, on that
secret cause, they nail our attention and hope.  Life is hereby
melted into an expectation or a religion.  Underneath the
inharmonious and trivial particulars, is a musical perfection, the
Ideal journeying always with us, the heaven without rent or seam.  Do
but observe the mode of our illumination.  When I converse with a
profound mind, or if at any time being alone I have good thoughts, I
do not at once arrive at satisfactions, as when, being thirsty, I
drink water, or go to the fire, being cold: no! but I am at first
apprised of my vicinity to a new and excellent region of life.  By
persisting to read or to think, this region gives further sign of
itself, as it were in flashes of light, in sudden discoveries of its
profound beauty and repose, as if the clouds that covered it parted
at intervals, and showed the approaching traveller the inland
mountains, with the tranquil eternal meadows spread at their base,
whereon flocks graze, and shepherds pipe and dance.  But every
insight from this realm of thought is felt as initial, and promises a
sequel.  I do not make it; I arrive there, and behold what was there
already.  I make!  O no!  I clap my hands in infantine joy and
amazement, before the first opening to me of this august
magnificence, old with the love and homage of innumerable ages, young
with the life of life, the sunbright Mecca of the desert.  And what a
future it opens!  I feel a new heart beating with the love of the new
beauty.  I am ready to die out of nature, and be born again into this
new yet unapproachable America I have found in the West.
 
        "Since neither now nor yesterday began
        These thoughts, which have been ever, nor yet can
        A man be found who their first entrance knew."
 
        If I have described life as a flux of moods, I must now add,
that there is that in us which changes not, and which ranks all
sensations and states of mind.  The consciousness in each man is a
sliding scale, which identifies him now with the First Cause, and now
with the flesh of his body; life above life, in infinite degrees.
The sentiment from which it sprung determines the dignity of any
deed, and the question ever is, not, what you have done or forborne,
but, at whose command you have done or forborne it.

        Fortune, Minerva, Muse, Holy Ghost, -- these are quaint names,
too narrow to cover this unbounded substance.  The baffled intellect
must still kneel before this cause, which refuses to be named, --
ineffable cause, which every fine genius has essayed to represent by
some emphatic symbol, as, Thales by water, Anaximenes by air,
Anaxagoras by (Nous) thought, Zoroaster by fire, Jesus and the
moderns by love: and the metaphor of each has become a national
religion.  The Chinese Mencius has not been the least successful in
his generalization.  "I fully understand language," he said, "and
nourish well my vast-flowing vigor." -- "I beg to ask what you call
vast-flowing vigor?" -- said his companion.  "The explanation,"
replied Mencius, "is difficult.  This vigor is supremely great, and
in the highest degree unbending.  Nourish it correctly, and do it no
injury, and it will fill up the vacancy between heaven and earth.
This vigor accords with and assists justice and reason, and leaves no
hunger." -- In our more correct writing, we give to this
generalization the name of Being, and thereby confess that we have
arrived as far as we can go.  Suffice it for the joy of the universe,
that we have not arrived at a wall, but at interminable oceans.  Our
life seems not present, so much as prospective; not for the affairs
on which it is wasted, but as a hint of this vast-flowing vigor.
Most of life seems to be mere advertisement of faculty: information
is given us not to sell ourselves cheap; that we are very great.  So,
in particulars, our greatness is always in a tendency or direction,
not in an action.  It is for us to believe in the rule, not in the
exception.  The noble are thus known from the ignoble.  So in
accepting the leading of the sentiments, it is not what we believe
concerning the immortality of the soul, or the like, but _the
universal impulse to believe_, that is the material circumstance, and
is the principal fact in the history of the globe.  Shall we describe
this cause as that which works directly?  The spirit is not helpless
or needful of mediate organs.  It has plentiful powers and direct
effects.  I am explained without explaining, I am felt without
acting, and where I am not.  Therefore all just persons are satisfied
with their own praise.  They refuse to explain themselves, and are
content that new actions should do them that office.  They believe
that we communicate without speech, and above speech, and that no
right action of ours is quite unaffecting to our friends, at whatever
distance; for the influence of action is not to be measured by miles.
Why should I fret myself, because a circumstance has occurred, which
hinders my presence where I was expected?  If I am not at the
meeting, my presence where I am, should be as useful to the
commonwealth of friendship and wisdom, as would be my presence in
that place.  I exert the same quality of power in all places. Thus
journeys the mighty Ideal before us; it never was known to fall into
the rear.  No man ever came to an experience which was satiating, but
his good is tidings of a better.  Onward and onward!  In liberated
moments, we know that a new picture of life and duty is already
possible; the elements already exist in many minds around you, of a
doctrine of life which shall transcend any written record we have.
The new statement will comprise the skepticisms, as well as the
faiths of society, and out of unbeliefs a creed shall be formed.
For, skepticisms are not gratuitous or lawless, but are limitations
of the affirmative statement, and the new philosophy must take them
in, and make affirmations out-side of them, just as much as it must
include the oldest beliefs.

        It is very unhappy, but too late to be helped, the discovery we
have made, that we exist.  That discovery is called the Fall of Man.
Ever afterwards, we suspect our instruments.  We have learned that we
do not see directly, but mediately, and that we have no means of
correcting these colored and distorting lenses which we are, or of
computing the amount of their errors.  Perhaps these subject-lenses
have a creative power; perhaps there are no objects.  Once we lived
in what we saw; now, the rapaciousness of this new power, which
threatens to absorb all things, engages us.  Nature, art, persons,
letters, religions, -- objects, successively tumble in, and God is
but one of its ideas.  Nature and literature are subjective
phenomena; every evil and every good thing is a shadow which we cast.
The street is full of humiliations to the proud.  As the fop
contrived to dress his bailiffs in his livery, and make them wait on
his guests at table, so the chagrins which the bad heart gives off as
bubbles, at once take form as ladies and gentlemen in the street,
shopmen or barkeepers in hotels, and threaten or insult whatever is
threatenable and insultable in us.  'Tis the same with our
idolatries.  People forget that it is the eye which makes the
horizon, and the rounding mind's eye which makes this or that man a
type or representative of humanity with the name of hero or saint.
Jesus the "providential man," is a good man on whom many people are
agreed that these optical laws shall take effect.  By love on one
part, and by forbearance to press objection on the other part, it is
for a time settled, that we will look at him in the centre of the
horizon, and ascribe to him the properties that will attach to any
man so seen.  But the longest love or aversion has a speedy term.
The great and crescive self, rooted in absolute nature, supplants all
relative existence, and ruins the kingdom of mortal friendship and
love.  Marriage (in what is called the spiritual world) is
impossible, because of the inequality between every subject and every
object.  The subject is the receiver of Godhead, and at every
comparison must feel his being enhanced by that cryptic might.
Though not in energy, yet by presence, this magazine of substance
cannot be otherwise than felt: nor can any force of intellect
attribute to the object the proper deity which sleeps or wakes
forever in every subject.  Never can love make consciousness and
ascription equal in force.  There will be the same gulf between every
me and thee, as between the original and the picture.  The universe
is the bride of the soul.  All private sympathy is partial. Two human
beings are like globes, which can touch only in a point, and, whilst
they remain in contact, all other points of each of the spheres are
inert; their turn must also come, and the longer a particular union
lasts, the more energy of appetency the parts not in union acquire.

        Life will be imaged, but cannot be divided nor doubled. Any
invasion of its unity would be chaos. The soul is not twin-born, but
the only begotten, and though revealing itself as child in time,
child in appearance, is of a fatal and universal power, admitting no
co-life. Every day, every act betrays the ill-concealed deity.  We
believe in ourselves, as we do not believe in others.  We permit all
things to ourselves, and that which we call sin in others, is
experiment for us.  It is an instance of our faith in ourselves, that
men never speak of crime as lightly as they think: or, every man
thinks a latitude safe for himself, which is nowise to be indulged to
another.  The act looks very differently on the inside, and on the
outside; in its quality, and in its consequences.  Murder in the
murderer is no such ruinous thought as poets and romancers will have
it; it does not unsettle him, or fright him from his ordinary notice
of trifles: it is an act quite easy to be contemplated, but in its
sequel, it turns out to be a horrible jangle and confounding of all
relations.  Especially the crimes that spring from love, seem right
and fair from the actor's point of view, but, when acted, are found
destructive of society.  No man at last believes that he can be lost,
nor that the crime in him is as black as in the felon.  Because the
intellect qualifies in our own case the moral judgments.  For there
is no crime to the intellect.  That is antinomian or hypernomian, and
judges law as well as fact.  "It is worse than a crime, it is a
blunder," said Napoleon, speaking the language of the intellect.  To
it, the world is a problem in mathematics or the science of quantity,
and it leaves out praise and blame, and all weak emotions.  All
stealing is comparative.  If you come to absolutes, pray who does not
steal?  Saints are sad, because they behold sin, (even when they
speculate,) from the point of view of the conscience, and not of the
intellect; a confusion of thought.  Sin seen from the thought, is a
diminution or _less_: seen from the conscience or will, it is pravity
or _bad_.  The intellect names it shade, absence of light, and no
essence.  The conscience must feel it as essence, essential evil.
This it is not: it has an objective existence, but no subjective.

        Thus inevitably does the universe wear our color, and every
object fall successively into the subject itself.  The subject
exists, the subject enlarges; all things sooner or later fall into
place. As I am, so I see; use what language we will, we can never say
anything but what we are; Hermes, Cadmus, Columbus, Newton,
Buonaparte, are the mind's ministers. Instead of feeling a poverty
when we encounter a great man, let us treat the new comer like a
travelling geologist, who passes through our estate, and shows us
good slate, or limestone, or anthracite, in our brush pasture. The
partial action of each strong mind in one direction, is a telescope
for the objects on which it is pointed. But every other part of
knowledge is to be pushed to the same extravagance, ere the soul
attains her due sphericity. Do you see that kitten chasing so
prettily her own tail?  If you could look with her eyes, you might
see her surrounded with hundreds of figures performing com-plex
dramas, with tragic and comic issues, long conversations, many
characters, many ups and downs of fate, -- and meantime it is only
puss and her tail.  How long before our masquerade will end its noise
of tamborines, laughter, and shouting, and we shall find it was a
solitary performance? -- A subject and an object, -- it takes so much
to make the galvanic circuit complete, but magnitude adds nothing.
What imports it whether it is Kepler and the sphere; Columbus and
America; a reader and his book; or puss with her tail?

        It is true that all the muses and love and religion hate these
developments, and will find a way to punish the chemist, who
publishes in the parlor the secrets of the laboratory.  And we cannot
say too little of our constitutional necessity of seeing things under
private aspects, or saturated with our humors.  And yet is the God
the native of these bleak rocks.  That need makes in morals the
capital virtue of self-trust.  We must hold hard to this poverty,
however scandalous, and by more vigorous self-recoveries, after the
sallies of action, possess our axis more firmly.  The life of truth
is cold, and so far mournful; but it is not the slave of tears,
contritions, and perturbations.  It does not attempt another's work,
nor adopt another's facts.  It is a main lesson of wisdom to know
your own from another's.  I have learned that I cannot dispose of
other people's facts; but I possess such a key to my own, as
persuades me against all their denials, that they also have a key to
theirs.  A sympathetic person is placed in the dilemma of a swimmer
among drowning men, who all catch at him, and if he give so much as a
leg or a finger, they will drown him.  They wish to be saved from the
mischiefs of their vices, but not from their vices.  Charity would be
wasted on this poor waiting on the symptoms.  A wise and hardy
physician will say, _Come out of that_, as the first condition of
advice.

        In this our talking America, we are ruined by our good nature
and listening on all sides.  This compliance takes away the power of
being greatly useful.  A man should not be able to look other than
directly and forthright.  A preoccupied attention is the only answer
to the importunate frivolity of other people: an attention, and to an
aim which makes their wants frivolous.  This is a divine answer, and
leaves no appeal, and no hard thoughts.  In Flaxman's drawing of the
Eumenides of Aeschylus, Orestes supplicates Apollo, whilst the Furies
sleep on the threshold.  The face of the god expresses a shade of
regret and compassion, but calm with the conviction of the
irreconcilableness of the two spheres.  He is born into other
politics, into the eternal and beautiful.  The man at his feet asks
for his interest in turmoils of the earth, into which his nature
cannot enter.  And the Eumenides there lying express pictorially this
disparity.  The god is surcharged with his divine destiny.

        Illusion, Temperament, Succession, Surface, Surprise, Reality,
Subjectiveness, -- these are threads on the loom of time, these are
the lords of life.  I dare not assume to give their order, but I name
them as I find them in my way.  I know better than to claim any
completeness for my picture.  I am a fragment, and this is a fragment
of me.  I can very confidently announce one or another law, which
throws itself into relief and form, but I am too young yet by some
ages to compile a code.  I gossip for my hour concerning the eternal
politics.  I have seen many fair pictures not in vain.  A wonderful
time I have lived in.  I am not the novice I was fourteen, nor yet
seven years ago.  Let who will ask, where is the fruit?  I find a
private fruit sufficient.  This is a fruit, -- that I should not ask
for a rash effect from meditations, counsels, and the hiving of
truths.  I should feel it pitiful to demand a result on this town and
county, an overt effect on the instant month and year.  The effect is
deep and secular as the cause.  It works on periods in which mortal
lifetime is lost.  All I know is reception; I am and I have: but I do
not get, and when I have fancied I had gotten anything, I found I did
not.  I worship with wonder the great Fortune.  My reception has been
so large, that I am not annoyed by receiving this or that
superabundantly.  I say to the Genius, if he will pardon the proverb,
_In for a mill, in for a million._ When I receive a new gift, I do
not macerate my body to make the account square, for, if I should
die, I could not make the account square.  The benefit overran the
merit the first day, and has overran the merit ever since.  The merit
itself, so-called, I reckon part of the receiving.

        Also, that hankering after an overt or practical effect seems
to me an apostasy.  In good earnest, I am willing to spare this most
unnecessary deal of doing.  Life wears to me a visionary face.
Hardest, roughest action is visionary also.  It is but a choice
between soft and turbulent dreams.  People disparage knowing and the
intellectual life, and urge doing.  I am very content with knowing,
if only I could know.  That is an august entertainment, and would
suffice me a great while.  To know a little, would be worth the
expense of this world.  I hear always the law of Adrastia, "that
every soul which had acquired any truth, should be safe from harm
until another period."

        I know that the world I converse with in the city and in the
farms, is not the world I _think._ I observe that difference and
shall observe it.  One day, I shall know the value and law of this
discrepance.  But I have not found that much was gained by manipular
attempts to realize the world of thought.  Many eager persons
successively make an experiment in this way, and make themselves
ridiculous.  They acquire democratic manners, they foam at the mouth,
they hate and deny.  Worse, I observe, that, in the history of
mankind, there is never a solitary example of success, -- taking
their own tests of success.  I say this polemically, or in reply to
the inquiry, why not realize your world?  But far be from me the
despair which prejudges the law by a paltry empiricism, -- since
there never was a right endeavor, but it succeeded.  Patience and
patience, we shall win at the last.  We must be very suspicious of
the deceptions of the element of time.  It takes a good deal of time
to eat or to sleep, or to earn a hundred dollars, and a very little
time to entertain a hope and an insight which becomes the light of
our life.  We dress our garden, eat our dinners, discuss the
household with our wives, and these things make no impression, are
forgotten next week; but in the solitude to which every man is always
returning, he has a sanity and revelations, which in his passage into
new worlds he will carry with him.  Never mind the ridicule, never
mind the defeat: up again, old heart! -- it seems to say, -- there is
victory yet for all justice; and the true romance which the world
exists to realize, will be the transformation of genius into
practical power.

 
 
        CHARACTER
 
 
        The sun set; but set not his hope:
        Stars rose; his faith was earlier up:
        Fixed on the enormous galaxy,
        Deeper and older seemed his eye:
        And matched his sufferance sublime
        The taciturnity of time.
        He spoke, and words more soft than rain
        Brought the Age of Gold again:
        His action won such reverence sweet,
        As hid all measure of the feat.

 
        Work of his hand
        He nor commends nor grieves:
        Pleads for itself the fact;
        As unrepenting Nature leaves
        Her every act.
 
 
 
        ESSAY III _Character_

        I have read that those who listened to Lord Chatham felt that
there was something finer in the man, than anything which he said.
It has been complained of our brilliant English historian of the
French Revolution, that when he has told all his facts about
Mirabeau, they do not justify his estimate of his genius.  The
Gracchi, Agis, Cleomenes, and others of Plutarch's heroes, do not in
the record of facts equal their own fame.  Sir Philip Sidney, the
Earl of Essex, Sir Walter Raleigh, are men of great figure, and of
few deeds.  We cannot find the smallest part of the personal weight
of Washington, in the narrative of his exploits.  The authority of
the name of Schiller is too great for his books.  This inequality of
the reputation to the works or the anecdotes, is not accounted for by
saying that the reverberation is longer than the thunder-clap; but
somewhat resided in these men which begot an expectation that outran
all their performance.  The largest part of their power was latent.
This is that which we call Character, -- a reserved force which acts
directly by presence, and without means.  It is conceived of as a
certain undemonstrable force, a Familiar or Genius, by whose impulses
the man is guided, but whose counsels he cannot impart; which is
company for him, so that such men are often solitary, or if they
chance to be social, do not need society, but can entertain
themselves very well alone.  The purest literary talent appears at
one time great, at another time small, but character is of a stellar
and undiminishable greatness.  What others effect by talent or by
eloquence, this man accomplishes by some magnetism.  "Half his
strength he put not forth." His victories are by demonstration of
superiority, and not by crossing of bayonets.  He conquers, because
his arrival alters the face of affairs.  `"O Iole! how did you know
that Hercules was a god?" "Because," answered Iole, "I was content
the moment my eyes fell on him.  When I beheld Theseus, I desired
that I might see him offer battle, or at least guide his horses in
the chariot-race; but Hercules did not wait for a contest; he
conquered whether he stood, or walked, or sat, or whatever thing he
did."]' Man, ordinarily a pendant to events, only half attached, and
that awkwardly, to the world he lives in, in these examples appears
to share the life of things, and to be an expression of the same laws
which control the tides and the sun, numbers and quantities.

        But to use a more modest illustration, and nearer home, I
observe, that in our political elections, where this element, if it
appears at all, can only occur in its coarsest form, we sufficiently
understand its incomparable rate.  The people know that they need in
their representative much more than talent, namely, the power to make
his talent trusted.  They cannot come at their ends by sending to
Congress a learned, acute, and fluent speaker, if he be not one, who,
before he was appointed by the people to represent them, was
appointed by Almighty God to stand for a fact, -- invincibly
persuaded of that fact in himself, -- so that the most confident and
the most violent persons learn that here is resistance on which both
impudence and terror are wasted, namely, faith in a fact.  The men
who carry their points do not need to inquire of their constituents
what they should say, but are themselves the country which they
represent: nowhere are its emotions or opinions so instant and true
as in them; nowhere so pure from a selfish infusion.  The
constituency at home hearkens to their words, watches the color of
their cheek, and therein, as in a glass, dresses its own.  Our public
assemblies are pretty good tests of manly force.  Our frank
countrymen of the west and south have a taste for character, and like
to know whether the New Englander is a substantial man, or whether
the hand can pass through him.

        The same motive force appears in trade.  There are geniuses in
trade, as well as in war, or the state, or letters; and the reason
why this or that man is fortunate, is not to be told.  It lies in the
man: that is all anybody can tell you about it.  See him, and you
will know as easily why he succeeds, as, if you see Napoleon, you
would comprehend his fortune.  In the new objects we recognize the
old game, the habit of fronting the fact, and not dealing with it at
second hand, through the perceptions of somebody else.  Nature seems
to authorize trade, as soon as you see the natural merchant, who
appears not so much a private agent, as her factor and Minister of
Commerce.  His natural probity combines with his insight into the
fabric of society, to put him above tricks, and he communicates to
all his own faith, that contracts are of no private interpretation.
The habit of his mind is a reference to standards of natural equity
and public advantage; and he inspires respect, and the wish to deal
with him, both for the quiet spirit of honor which attends him, and
for the intellectual pastime which the spectacle of so much ability
affords.  This immensely stretched trade, which makes the capes of
the Southern Ocean his wharves, and the Atlantic Sea his familiar
port, centres in his brain only; and nobody in the universe can make
his place good.  In his parlor, I see very well that he has been at
hard work this morning, with that knitted brow, and that settled
humor, which all his desire to be courteous cannot shake off.  I see
plainly how many firm acts have been done; how many valiant _noes_
have this day been spoken, when others would have uttered ruinous
_yeas_.  I see, with the pride of art, and skill of masterly
arithmetic and power of remote combination, the consciousness of
being an agent and playfellow of the original laws of the world.  He
too believes that none can supply him, and that a man must be born to
trade, or he cannot learn it.

        This virtue draws the mind more, when it appears in action to
ends not so mixed.  It works with most energy in the smallest
companies and in private relations.  In all cases, it is an
extraordinary and incomputable agent.  The excess of physical
strength is paralyzed by it.  Higher natures overpower lower ones by
affecting them with a certain sleep.  The faculties are locked up,
and offer no resistance.  Perhaps that is the universal law.  When
the high cannot bring up the low to itself, it benumbs it, as man
charms down the resistance of the lower animals.  Men exert on each
other a similar occult power.  How often has the influence of a true
master realized all the tales of magic!  A river of command seemed to
run down from his eyes into all those who beheld him, a torrent of
strong sad light, like an Ohio or Danube, which pervaded them with
his thoughts, and colored all events with the hue of his mind.  "What
means did you employ?" was the question asked of the wife of Concini,
in regard to her treatment of Mary of Medici; and the answer was,
"Only that influence which every strong mind has over a weak one."
Cannot Caesar in irons shuffle off the irons, and transfer them to
the person of Hippo or Thraso the turnkey?  Is an iron handcuff so
immutable a bond?  Suppose a slaver on the coast of Guinea should
take on board a gang of negroes, which should contain persons of the
stamp of Toussaint L'Ouverture: or, let us fancy, under these swarthy
masks he has a gang of Washingtons in chains.  When they arrive at
Cuba, will the relative order of the ship's company be the same?  Is
there nothing but rope and iron?  Is there no love, no reverence?  Is
there never a glimpse of right in a poor slave-captain's mind; and
cannot these be supposed available to break, or elude, or in any
manner overmatch the tension of an inch or two of iron ring?

        This is a natural power, like light and heat, and all nature
cooperates with it.  The reason why we feel one man's presence, and
do not feel another's, is as simple as gravity.  Truth is the summit
of being: justice is the application of it to affairs.  All
individual natures stand in a scale, according to the purity of this
element in them.  The will of the pure runs down from them into other
natures, as water runs down from a higher into a lower vessel.  This
natural force is no more to be withstood, than any other natural
force.  We can drive a stone upward for a moment into the air, but it
is yet true that all stones will forever fall; and whatever instances
can be quoted of unpunished theft, or of a lie which somebody
credited, justice must prevail, and it is the privilege of truth to
make itself believed.  Character is this moral order seen through the
medium of an individual nature.  An individual is an encloser.  Time
and space, liberty and necessity, truth and thought, are left at
large no longer.  Now, the universe is a close or pound.  All things
exist in the man tinged with the manners of his soul.  With what
quality is in him, he infuses all nature that he can reach; nor does
he tend to lose himself in vastness, but, at how long a curve soever,
all his regards return into his own good at last.  He animates all he
can, and he sees only what he animates.  He encloses the world, as
the patriot does his country, as a material basis for his character,
and a theatre for action.  A healthy soul stands united with the Just
and the True, as the magnet arranges itself with the pole, so that he
stands to all beholders like a transparent object betwixt them and
the sun, and whoso journeys towards the sun, journeys towards that
person.  He is thus the medium of the highest influence to all who
are not on the same level.  Thus, men of character are the conscience
of the society to which they belong.

        The natural measure of this power is the resistance of
circumstances.  Impure men consider life as it is reflected in
opinions, events, and persons.  They cannot see the action, until it
is done.  Yet its moral element pre-existed in the actor, and its
quality as right or wrong, it was easy to predict.  Everything in
nature is bipolar, or has a positive and negative pole.  There is a
male and a female, a spirit and a fact, a north and a south.  Spirit
is the positive, the event is the negative.  Will is the north,
action the south pole.  Character may be ranked as having its natural
place in the north.  It shares the magnetic currents of the system.
The feeble souls are drawn to the south or negative pole.  They look
at the profit or hurt of the action.  They never behold a principle
until it is lodged in a person.  They do not wish to be lovely, but
to be loved.  The class of character like to hear of their faults:
the other class do not like to hear of faults; they worship events;
secure to them a fact, a connexion, a certain chain of circumstances,
and they will ask no more.  The hero sees that the event is
ancillary: it must follow _him._ A given order of events has no power
to secure to him the satisfaction which the imagination attaches to
it; the soul of goodness escapes from any set of circumstances,
whilst prosperity belongs to a certain mind, and will introduce that
power and victory which is its natural fruit, into any order of
events.  No change of circumstances can repair a defect of character.
We boast our emancipation from many superstitions; but if we have
broken any idols, it is through a transfer of the idolatry.  What
have I gained, that I no longer immolate a bull to Jove, or to
Neptune, or a mouse to Hecate; that I do not tremble before the
Eumenides, or the Catholic Purgatory, or the Calvinistic
Judgment-day,--- if I quake at opinion, the public opinion, as we
call it; or at the threat of assault, or contumely, or bad neighbors,
or poverty, or mutilation, or at the rumor of revolution, or of
murder?  If I quake, what matters it what I quake at?  Our proper
vice takes form in one or another shape, according to the sex, age,
or temperament of the person, and, if we are capable of fear, will
readily find terrors.  The covetousness or the malignity which
saddens me, when I ascribe it to society, is my own.  I am always
environed by myself.  On the other part, rectitude is a perpetual
victory, celebrated not by cries of joy, but by serenity, which is
joy fixed or habitual.  It is disgraceful to fly to events for
confirmation of our truth and worth.  The capitalist does not run
every hour to the broker, to coin his advantages into current money
of the realm; he is satisfied to read in the quotations of the
market, that his stocks have risen.  The same transport which the
occurrence of the best events in the best order would occasion me, I
must learn to taste purer in the perception that my position is every
hour meliorated, and does already command those events I desire.
That exultation is only to be checked by the foresight of an order of
things so excellent, as to throw all our prosperities into the
deepest shade.

        The face which character wears to me is self-sufficingness.  I
revere the person who is riches; so that I cannot think of him as
alone, or poor, or exiled, or unhappy, or a client, but as perpetual
patron, benefactor, and beatified man.  Character is centrality, the
impossibility of being displaced or overset.  A man should give us a
sense of mass.  Society is frivolous, and shreds its day into scraps,
its conversation into ceremonies and escapes.  But if I go to see an
ingenious man, I shall think myself poorly entertained if he give me
nimble pieces of benevolence and etiquette; rather he shall stand
stoutly in his place, and let me apprehend, if it were only his
resistance; know that I have encountered a new and positive quality;
-- great refreshment for both of us.  It is much, that he does not
accept the conventional opinions and practices.  That nonconformity
will remain a goad and remembrancer, and every inquirer will have to
dispose of him, in the first place.  There is nothing real or useful
that is not a seat of war.  Our houses ring with laughter and
personal and critical gossip, but it helps little.  But the uncivil,
unavailable man, who is a problem and a threat to society, whom it
cannot let pass in silence, but must either worship or hate, -- and
to whom all parties feel related, both the leaders of opinion, and
the obscure and eccentric, -- he helps; he puts America and Europe in
the wrong, and destroys the skepticism which says, `man is a doll,
let us eat and drink, 'tis the best we can do,' by illuminating the
untried and unknown.  Acquiescence in the establishment, and appeal
to the public, indicate infirm faith, heads which are not clear, and
which must see a house built, before they can comprehend the plan of
it.  The wise man not only leaves out of his thought the many, but
leaves out the few.  Fountains, fountains, the self-moved, the
absorbed, the commander because he is commanded, the assured, the
primary,--- they are good; for these announce the instant presence of
supreme power.

        Our action should rest mathematically on our substance.  In
nature, there are no false valuations.  A pound of water in the
ocean-tempest has no more gravity than in a midsummer pond.  All
things work exactly according to their quality, and according to
their quantity; attempt nothing they cannot do, except man only.  He
has pretension: he wishes and attempts things beyond his force.  I
read in a book of English memoirs, "Mr. Fox (afterwards Lord Holland)
said, he must have the Treasury; he had served up to it, and would
have it." -- Xenophon and his Ten Thousand were quite equal to what
they attempted, and did it; so equal, that it was not suspected to be
a grand and inimitable exploit.  Yet there stands that fact
unrepeated, a high-water-mark in military history.  Many have
attempted it since, and not been equal to it.  It is only on reality,
that any power of action can be based.  No institution will be better
than the institutor.  I knew an amiable and accomplished person who
undertook a practical reform, yet I was never able to find in him the
enterprise of love he took in hand.  He adopted it by ear and by the
understanding from the books he had been reading.  All his action was
tentative, a piece of the city carried out into the fields, and was
the city still, and no new fact, and could not inspire enthusiasm.
Had there been something latent in the man, a terrible undemonstrated
genius agitating and embarrassing his demeanor, we had watched for
its advent.  It is not enough that the intellect should see the
evils, and their remedy.  We shall still postpone our existence, nor
take the ground to which we are entitled, whilst it is only a
thought, and not a spirit that incites us.  We have not yet served up
to it.

        These are properties of life, and another trait is the notice
of incessant growth.  Men should be intelligent and earnest.  They
must also make us feel, that they have a controlling happy future,
opening before them, which sheds a splendor on the passing hour.  The
hero is misconceived and misreported: he cannot therefore wait to
unravel any man's blunders: he is again on his road, adding new
powers and honors to his domain, and new claims on your heart, which
will bankrupt you, if you have loitered about the old things, and
have not kept your relation to him, by adding to your wealth.  New
actions are the only apologies and explanations of old ones, which
the noble can bear to offer or to receive.  If your friend has
displeased you, you shall not sit down to consider it, for he has
already lost all memory of the passage, and has doubled his power to
serve you, and, ere you can rise up again, will burden you with
blessings.

        We have no pleasure in thinking of a benevolence that is only
measured by its works.  Love is inexhaustible, and if its estate is
wasted, its granary emptied, still cheers and enriches, and the man,
though he sleep, seems to purify the air, and his house to adorn the
landscape and strengthen the laws.  People always recognize this
difference.  We know who is benevolent, by quite other means than the
amount of subscription to soup-societies.  It is only low merits that
can be enumerated.  Fear, when your friends say to you what you have
done well, and say it through; but when they stand with uncertain
timid looks of respect and half-dislike, and must suspend their
judgment for years to come, you may begin to hope.  Those who live to
the future must always appear selfish to those who live to the
present.  Therefore it was droll in the good Riemer, who has written
memoirs of Goethe, to make out a list of his donations and good
deeds, as, so many hundred thalers given to Stilling, to Hegel, to
Tischbein: a lucrative place found for Professor Voss, a post under
the Grand Duke for Herder, a pension for Meyer, two professors
recommended to foreign universities, &c. &c.  The longest list of
specifications of benefit, would look very short.  A man is a poor
creature, if he is to be measured so.  For, all these, of course, are
exceptions; and the rule and hodiernal life of a good man is
benefaction.  The true charity of Goethe is to be inferred from the
account he gave Dr. Eckermann, of the way in which he had spent his
fortune.  "Each bon-mot of mine has cost a purse of gold.  Half a
million of my own money, the fortune I inherited, my salary, and the
large income derived from my writings for fifty years back, have been
expended to instruct me in what I now know.  I have besides seen,"
&c.

        I own it is but poor chat and gossip to go to enumerate traits
of this simple and rapid power, and we are painting the lightning
with charcoal; but in these long nights and vacations, I like to
console myself so.  Nothing but itself can copy it.  A word warm from
the heart enriches me.  I surrender at discretion.  How death-cold is
literary genius before this fire of life!  These are the touches that
reanimate my heavy soul, and give it eyes to pierce the dark of
nature.  I find, where I thought myself poor, there was I most rich.
Thence comes a new intellectual exaltation, to be again rebuked by
some new exhibition of character.  Strange alternation of attraction
and repulsion!  Character repudiates intellect, yet excites it; and
character passes into thought, is published so, and then is ashamed
before new flashes of moral worth.

        Character is nature in the highest form.  It is of no use to
ape it, or to contend with it.  Somewhat is possible of resistance,
and of persistence, and of creation, to this power, which will foil
all emulation.

        This masterpiece is best where no hands but nature's have been
laid on it.  Care is taken that the greatly-destined shall slip up
into life in the shade, with no thousand-eyed Athens to watch and
blazon every new thought, every blushing emotion of young genius.
Two persons lately, -- very young children of the most high God, --
have given me occasion for thought.  When I explored the source of
their sanctity, and charm for the imagination, it seemed as if each
answered, `From my non-conformity: I never listened to your people's
law, or to what they call their gospel, and wasted my time.  I was
content with the simple rural poverty of my own: hence this
sweetness: my work never reminds you of that; -- is pure of that.'
And nature advertises me in such persons, that, in democratic
America, she will not be democratized.  How cloistered and
constitutionally sequestered from the market and from scandal!  It
was only this morning, that I sent away some wild flowers of these
wood-gods.  They are a relief from literature, -- these fresh
draughts from the sources of thought and sentiment; as we read, in an
age of polish and criticism, the first lines of written prose and
verse of a nation.  How captivating is their devotion to their
favorite books, whether Aeschylus, Dante, Shakspeare, or Scott, as
feeling that they have a stake in that book: who touches that,
touches them; -- and especially the total solitude of the critic, the
Patmos of thought from which he writes, in unconsciousness of any
eyes that shall ever read this writing.  Could they dream on still,
as angels, and not wake to comparisons, and to be flattered!  Yet
some natures are too good to be spoiled by praise, and wherever the
vein of thought reaches down into the profound, there is no danger
from vanity.  Solemn friends will warn them of the danger of the
head's being turned by the flourish of trumpets, but they can afford
to smile.  I remember the indignation of an eloquent Methodist at the
kind admonitions of a Doctor of Divinity,--- `My friend, a man can
neither be praised nor insulted.' But forgive the counsels; they are
very natural.  I remember the thought which occurred to me when some
ingenious and spiritual foreigners came to America, was, Have you
been victimized in being brought hither? -- or, prior to that, answer
me this, `Are you victimizable?'

        As I have said, nature keeps these sovereignties in her own
hands, and however pertly our sermons and disciplines would divide
some share of credit, and teach that the laws fashion the citizen,
she goes her own gait, and puts the wisest in the wrong.  She makes
very light of gospels and prophets, as one who has a great many more
to produce, and no excess of time to spare on any one.  There is a
class of men, individuals of which appear at long intervals, so
eminently endowed with insight and virtue, that they have been
unanimously saluted as _divine_, and who seem to be an accumulation
of that power we consider.  Divine persons are character born, or, to
borrow a phrase from Napoleon, they are victory organized.  They are
usually received with ill-will, because they are new, and because
they set a bound to the exaggeration that has been made of the
personality of the last divine person.  Nature never rhymes her
children, nor makes two men alike.  When we see a great man, we fancy
a resemblance to some historical person, and predict the sequel of
his character and fortune, a result which he is sure to disappoint.
None will ever solve the problem of his character according to our
prejudice, but only in his own high unprecedented way.  Character
wants room; must not be crowded on by persons, nor be judged from
glimpses got in the press of affairs or on few occasions.  It needs
perspective, as a great building.  It may not, probably does not,
form relations rapidly; and we should not require rash explanation,
either on the popular ethics, or on our own, of its action.

        I look on Sculpture as history.  I do not think the Apollo and
the Jove impossible in flesh and blood.  Every trait which the artist
recorded in stone, he had seen in life, and better than his copy.  We
have seen many counterfeits, but we are born believers in great men.
How easily we read in old books, when men were few, of the smallest
action of the patriarchs.  We require that a man should be so large
and columnar in the landscape, that it should deserve to be recorded,
that he arose, and girded up his loins, and departed to such a place.
The most credible pictures are those of majestic men who prevailed at
their entrance, and convinced the senses; as happened to the eastern
magian who was sent to test the merits of Zertusht or Zoroaster.
When the Yunani sage arrived at Balkh, the Persians tell us, Gushtasp
appointed a day on which the Mobeds of every country should assemble,
and a golden chair was placed for the Yunani sage.  Then the beloved
of Yezdam, the prophet Zertusht, advanced into the midst of the
assembly.  The Yunani sage, on seeing that chief, said, "This form
and this gait cannot lie, and nothing but truth can proceed from
them." Plato said, it was impossible not to believe in the children
of the gods, "though they should speak without probable or necessary
arguments." I should think myself very unhappy in my associates, if I
could not credit the best things in history.  "John Bradshaw," says
Milton, "appears like a consul, from whom the fasces are not to
depart with the year; so that not on the tribunal only, but
throughout his life, you would regard him as sitting in judgment upon
kings." I find it more credible, since it is anterior information,
that one man should _know heaven_, as the Chinese say, than that so
many men should know the world.  "The virtuous prince confronts the
gods, without any misgiving.  He waits a hundred ages till a sage
comes, and does not doubt.  He who confronts the gods, without any
misgiving, knows heaven; he who waits a hundred ages until a sage
comes, without doubting, knows men.  Hence the virtuous prince moves,
and for ages shows empire the way." But there is no need to seek
remote examples.  He is a dull observer whose experience has not
taught him the reality and force of magic, as well as of chemistry.
The coldest precisian cannot go abroad without encountering
inexplicable influences.  One man fastens an eye on him, and the
graves of the memory render up their dead; the secrets that make him
wretched either to keep or to betray, must be yielded; -- another,
and he cannot speak, and the bones of his body seem to lose their
cartilages; the entrance of a friend adds grace, boldness, and
eloquence to him; and there are persons, he cannot choose but
remember, who gave a transcendant expansion to his thought, and
kindled another life in his bosom.

        What is so excellent as strict relations of amity, when they
spring from this deep root?  The sufficient reply to the skeptic, who
doubts the power and the furniture of man, is in that possibility of
joyful intercourse with persons, which makes the faith and practice
of all reasonable men.  I know nothing which life has to offer so
satisfying as the profound good understanding, which can subsist,
after much exchange of good offices, between two virtuous men, each
of whom is sure of himself, and sure of his friend.  It is a
happiness which postpones all other gratifications, and makes
politics, and commerce, and churches, cheap.  For, when men shall
meet as they ought, each a benefactor, a shower of stars, clothed
with thoughts, with deeds, with accomplishments, it should be the
festival of nature which all things announce.  Of such friendship,
love in the sexes is the first symbol, as all other things are
symbols of love.  Those relations to the best men, which, at one
time, we reckoned the romances of youth, become, in the progress of
the character, the most solid enjoyment.

 
        If it were possible to live in right relations with men! -- if
we could abstain from asking anything of them, from asking their
praise, or help, or pity, and content us with compelling them through
the virtue of the eldest laws!  Could we not deal with a few persons,
-- with one person, -- after the unwritten statutes, and make an
experiment of their efficacy?  Could we not pay our friend the
compliment of truth, of silence, of forbearing?  Need we be so eager
to seek him?  If we are related, we shall meet.  It was a tradition
of the ancient world, that no metamorphosis could hide a god from a
god; and there is a Greek verse which runs,

        "The Gods are to each other not unknown."
 
        Friends also follow the laws of divine necessity; they
gravitate to each other, and cannot otherwise: --
 
        When each the other shall avoid,
        Shall each by each be most enjoyed.

        Their relation is not made, but allowed.  The gods must seat
themselves without seneschal in our Olympus, and as they can instal
themselves by seniority divine.  Society is spoiled, if pains are
taken, if the associates are brought a mile to meet.  And if it be
not society, it is a mischievous, low, degrading jangle, though made
up of the best.  All the greatness of each is kept back, and every
foible in painful activity, as if the Olympians should meet to
exchange snuff-boxes.

        Life goes headlong.  We chase some flying scheme, or we are
hunted by some fear or command behind us.  But if suddenly we
encounter a friend, we pause; our heat and hurry look foolish enough;
now pause, now possession, is required, and the power to swell the
moment from the resources of the heart.  The moment is all, in all
noble relations.

        A divine person is the prophecy of the mind; a friend is the
hope of the heart.  Our beatitude waits for the fulfilment of these
two in one.  The ages are opening this moral force.  All force is the
shadow or symbol of that.  Poetry is joyful and strong, as it draws
its inspiration thence.  Men write their names on the world, as they
are filled with this.  History has been mean; our nations have been
mobs; we have never seen a man: that divine form we do not yet know,
but only the dream and prophecy of such: we do not know the majestic
manners which belong to him, which appease and exalt the beholder.
We shall one day see that the most private is the most public energy,
that quality atones for quantity, and grandeur of character acts in
the dark, and succors them who never saw it.  What greatness has yet
appeared, is beginnings and encouragements to us in this direction.
The history of those gods and saints which the world has written, and
then worshipped, are documents of character.  The ages have exulted
in the manners of a youth who owed nothing to fortune, and who was
hanged at the Tyburn of his nation, who, by the pure quality of his
nature, shed an epic splendor around the facts of his death, which
has transfigured every particular into an universal symbol for the
eyes of mankind.  This great defeat is hitherto our highest fact.
But the mind requires a victory to the senses, a force of character
which will convert judge, jury, soldier, and king; which will rule
animal and mineral virtues, and blend with the courses of sap, of
rivers, of winds, of stars, and of moral agents.

        If we cannot attain at a bound to these grandeurs, at least,
let us do them homage.  In society, high advantages are set down to
the possessor, as disadvantages.  It requires the more wariness in
our private estimates.  I do not forgive in my friends the failure to
know a fine character, and to entertain it with thankful hospitality.
When, at last, that which we have always longed for, is arrived, and
shines on us with glad rays out of that far celestial land, then to
be coarse, then to be critical, and treat such a visitant with the
jabber and suspicion of the streets, argues a vulgarity that seems to
shut the doors of heaven.  This is confusion, this the right
insanity, when the soul no longer knows its own, nor where its
allegiance, its religion, are due.  Is there any religion but this,
to know, that, wherever in the wide desert of being, the holy
sentiment we cherish has opened into a flower, it blooms for me? if
none sees it, I see it; I am aware, if I alone, of the greatness of
the fact.  Whilst it blooms, I will keep sabbath or holy time, and
suspend my gloom, and my folly and jokes.  Nature is indulged by the
presence of this guest.  There are many eyes that can detect and
honor the prudent and household virtues; there are many that can
discern Genius on his starry track, though the mob is incapable; but
when that love which is all-suffering, all-abstaining, all-aspiring,
which has vowed to itself, that it will be a wretch and also a fool
in this world, sooner than soil its white hands by any compliances,
comes into our streets and houses, -- only the pure and aspiring can
know its face, and the only compliment they can pay it, is to own it.

 
 
        MANNERS
 
        "How near to good is what is fair!
        Which we no sooner see,
        But with the lines and outward air
        Our senses taken be.
 
                Again yourselves compose,
        And now put all the aptness on
        Of Figure, that Proportion
                Or Color can disclose;
        That if those silent arts were lost,
        Design and Picture, they might boast
                From you a newer ground,
        Instructed by the heightening sense
        Of dignity and reverence
                In their true motions found."
        Ben Jonson

 

        ESSAY IV _Manners_

        Half the world, it is said, knows not how the other half live.
Our Exploring Expedition saw the Feejee islanders getting their
dinner off human bones; and they are said to eat their own wives and
children.  The husbandry of the modern inhabitants of Gournou (west
of old Thebes) is philosophical to a fault.  To set up their
housekeeping, nothing is requisite but two or three earthern pots, a
stone to grind meal, and a mat which is the bed.  The house, namely,
a tomb, is ready without rent or taxes.  No rain can pass through the
roof, and there is no door, for there is no want of one, as there is
nothing to lose.  If the house do not please them, they walk out and
enter another, as there are several hundreds at their command.  "It
is somewhat singular," adds Belzoni, to whom we owe this account, "to
talk of happiness among people who live in sepulchres, among the
corpses and rags of an ancient nation which they know nothing of." In
the deserts of Borgoo, the rock-Tibboos still dwell in caves, like
cliff-swallows, and the language of these negroes is compared by
their neighbors to the shrieking of bats, and to the whistling of
birds.  Again, the Bornoos have no proper names; individuals are
called after their height, thickness, or other accidental quality,
and have nicknames merely.  But the salt, the dates, the ivory, and
the gold, for which these horrible regions are visited, find their
way into countries, where the purchaser and consumer can hardly be
ranked in one race with these cannibals and man-stealers; countries
where man serves himself with metals, wood, stone, glass, gum,
cotton, silk, and wool; honors himself with architecture; writes
laws, and contrives to execute his will through the hands of many
nations; and, especially, establishes a select society, running
through all the countries of intelligent men, a self-constituted
aristocracy, or fraternity of the best, which, without written law or
exact usage of any kind, perpetuates itself, colonizes every
new-planted island, and adopts and makes its own whatever personal
beauty or extraordinary native endowment anywhere appears.

 
        What fact more conspicuous in modern history, than the creation
of the gentleman?  Chivalry is that, and loyalty is that, and, in
English literature, half the drama, and all the novels, from Sir
Philip Sidney to Sir Walter Scott, paint this figure.  The word
_gentleman_, which, like the word Christian, must hereafter
characterize the present and the few preceding centuries, by the
importance attached to it, is a homage to personal and incommunicable
properties.  Frivolous and fantastic additions have got associated
with the name, but the steady interest of mankind in it must be
attributed to the valuable properties which it designates.  An
element which unites all the most forcible persons of every country;
makes them intelligible and agreeable to each other, and is somewhat
so precise, that it is at once felt if an individual lack the masonic
sign, cannot be any casual product, but must be an average result of
the character and faculties universally found in men.  It seems a
certain permanent average; as the atmosphere is a permanent
composition, whilst so many gases are combined only to be
decompounded.  _Comme il faut_, is the Frenchman's description of
good society, _as we must be_.  It is a spontaneous fruit of talents
and feelings of precisely that class who have most vigor, who take
the lead in the world of this hour, and, though far from pure, far
from constituting the gladdest and highest tone of human feeling, is
as good as the whole society permits it to be.  It is made of the
spirit, more than of the talent of men, and is a compound result,
into which every great force enters as an ingredient, namely, virtue,
wit, beauty, wealth, and power.

        There is something equivocal in all the words in use to express
the excellence of manners and social cultivation, because the
quantities are fluxional, and the last effect is assumed by the
senses as the cause.  The word _gentleman_ has not any correlative
abstract to express the quality.  _Gentility_ is mean, and
_gentilesse_ is obsolete.  But we must keep alive in the vernacular,
the distinction between _fashion_, a word of narrow and often
sinister meaning, and the heroic character which the gentleman
imports.  The usual words, however, must be respected: they will be
found to contain the root of the matter.  The point of distinction in
all this class of names, as courtesy, chivalry, fashion, and the
like, is, that the flower and fruit, not the grain of the tree, are
contemplated.  It is beauty which is the aim this time, and not
worth.  The result is now in question, although our words intimate
well enough the popular feeling, that the appearance supposes a
substance.  The gentleman is a man of truth, lord of his own actions,
and expressing that lordship in his behavior, not in any manner
dependent and servile either on persons, or opinions, or possessions.
Beyond this fact of truth and real force, the word denotes
good-nature or benevolence: manhood first, and then gentleness.  The
popular notion certainly adds a condition of ease and fortune; but
that is a natural result of personal force and love, that they should
possess and dispense the goods of the world.  In times of violence,
every eminent person must fall in with many opportunities to approve
his stoutness and worth; therefore every man's name that emerged at
all from the mass in the feudal ages, rattles in our ear like a
flourish of trumpets.  But personal force never goes out of fashion.
That is still paramount today, and, in the moving crowd of good
society, the men of valor and reality are known, and rise to their
natural place.  The competition is transferred from war to politics
and trade, but the personal force appears readily enough in these new
arenas.

        Power first, or no leading class.  In politics and in trade,
bruisers and pirates are of better promise than talkers and clerks.
God knows that all sorts of gentlemen knock at the door; but whenever
used in strictness, and with any emphasis, the name will be found to
point at original energy.  It describes a man standing in his own
right, and working after untaught methods.  In a good lord, there
must first be a good animal, at least to the extent of yielding the
incomparable advantage of animal spirits.  The ruling class must have
more, but they must have these, giving in every company the sense of
power, which makes things easy to be done which daunt the wise.  The
society of the energetic class, in their friendly and festive
meetings, is full of courage, and of attempts, which intimidate the
pale scholar.  The courage which girls exhibit is like a battle of
Lundy's Lane, or a sea-fight.  The intellect relies on memory to make
some supplies to face these extemporaneous squadrons.  But memory is
a base mendicant with basket and badge, in the presence of these
sudden masters.  The rulers of society must be up to the work of the
world, and equal to their versatile office: men of the right
Caesarian pattern, who have great range of affinity.  I am far from
believing the timid maxim of Lord Falkland, ("that for ceremony there
must go two to it; since a bold fellow will go through the cunningest
forms,") and am of opinion that the gentleman is the bold fellow
whose forms are not to be broken through; and only that plenteous
nature is rightful master, which is the complement of whatever person
it converses with.  My gentleman gives the law where he is; he will
outpray saints in chapel, outgeneral veterans in the field, and
outshine all courtesy in the hall.  He is good company for pirates,
and good with academicians; so that it is useless to fortify yourself
against him; he has the private entrance to all minds, and I could as
easily exclude myself, as him.  The famous gentlemen of Asia and
Europe have been of this strong type: Saladin, Sapor, the Cid, Julius
Caesar, Scipio, Alexander, Pericles, and the lordliest personages.
They sat very carelessly in their chairs, and were too excellent
themselves, to value any condition at a high rate.

        A plentiful fortune is reckoned necessary, in the popular
judgment, to the completion of this man of the world: and it is a
material deputy which walks through the dance which the first has
led.  Money is not essential, but this wide affinity is, which
transcends the habits of clique and caste, and makes itself felt by
men of all classes.  If the aristocrat is only valid in fashionable
circles, and not with truckmen, he will never be a leader in fashion;
and if the man of the people cannot speak on equal terms with the
gentleman, so that the gentleman shall perceive that he is already
really of his own order, he is not to be feared.  Diogenes, Socrates,
and Epaminondas, are gentlemen of the best blood, who have chosen the
condition of poverty, when that of wealth was equally open to them.
I use these old names, but the men I speak of are my contemporaries.
Fortune will not supply to every generation one of these
well-appointed knights, but every collection of men furnishes some
example of the class: and the politics of this country, and the trade
of every town, are controlled by these hardy and irresponsible doers,
who have invention to take the lead, and a broad sympathy which puts
them in fellowship with crowds, and makes their action popular.

        The manners of this class are observed and caught with devotion
by men of taste.  The association of these masters with each other,
and with men intelligent of their merits, is mutually agreeable and
stimulating.  The good forms, the happiest expressions of each, are
repeated and adopted.  By swift consent, everything superfluous is
dropped, everything graceful is renewed.  Fine manners show
themselves formidable to the uncultivated man.  They are a subtler
science of defence to parry and intimidate; but once matched by the
skill of the other party, they drop the point of the sword, -- points
and fences disappear, and the youth finds himself in a more
transparent atmosphere, wherein life is a less troublesome game, and
not a misunderstanding rises between the players.  Manners aim to
facilitate life, to get rid of impediments, and bring the man pure to
energize.  They aid our dealing and conversation, as a railway aids
travelling, by getting rid of all avoidable obstructions of the road,
and leaving nothing to be conquered but pure space.  These forms very
soon become fixed, and a fine sense of propriety is cultivated with
the more heed, that it becomes a badge of social and civil
distinctions.  Thus grows up Fashion, an equivocal semblance, the
most puissant, the most fantastic and frivolous, the most feared and
followed, and which morals and violence assault in vain.

        There exists a strict relation between the class of power, and
the exclusive and polished circles.  The last are always filled or
filling from the first.  The strong men usually give some allowance
even to the petulances of fashion, for that affinity they find in it.
Napoleon, child of the revolution, destroyer of the old noblesse,
never ceased to court the Faubourg St. Germain: doubtless with the
feeling, that fashion is a homage to men of his stamp.  Fashion,
though in a strange way, represents all manly virtue.  It is virtue
gone to seed: it is a kind of posthumous honor.  It does not often
caress the great, but the children of the great: it is a hall of the
Past.  It usually sets its face against the great of this hour.
Great men are not commonly in its halls: they are absent in the
field: they are working, not triumphing.  Fashion is made up of their
children; of those, who, through the value and virtue of somebody,
have acquired lustre to their name, marks of distinction, means of
cultivation and generosity, and, in their physical organization, a
certain health and excellence, which secures to them, if not the
highest power to work, yet high power to enjoy.  The class of power,
the working heroes, the Cortez, the Nelson, the Napoleon, see that
this is the festivity and permanent celebration of such as they; that
fashion is funded talent; is Mexico, Marengo, and Trafalgar beaten
out thin; that the brilliant names of fashion run back to just such
busy names as their own, fifty or sixty years ago.  They are the
sowers, their sons shall be the reapers, and _their_ sons, in the
ordinary course of things, must yield the possession of the harvest
to new competitors with keener eyes and stronger frames.  The city is
recruited from the country.  In the year 1805, it is said, every
legitimate monarch in Europe was imbecile.  The city would have died
out, rotted, and exploded, long ago, but that it was reinforced from
the fields.  It is only country which came to town day before
yesterday, that is city and court today.

        Aristocracy and fashion are certain inevitable results.  These
mutual selections are indestructible.  If they provoke anger in the
least favored class, and the excluded majority revenge themselves on
the excluding minority, by the strong hand, and kill them, at once a
new class finds itself at the top, as certainly as cream rises in a
bowl of milk: and if the people should destroy class after class,
until two men only were left, one of these would be the leader, and
would be involuntarily served and copied by the other.  You may keep
this minority out of sight and out of mind, but it is tenacious of
life, and is one of the estates of the realm.  I am the more struck
with this tenacity, when I see its work.  It respects the
administration of such unimportant matters, that we should not look
for any durability in its rule.  We sometimes meet men under some
strong moral influence, as, a patriotic, a literary, a religious
movement, and feel that the moral sentiment rules man and nature.  We
think all other distinctions and ties will be slight and fugitive,
this of caste or fashion, for example; yet come from year to year,
and see how permanent that is, in this Boston or New York life of
man, where, too, it has not the least countenance from the law of the
land.  Not in Egypt or in India a firmer or more impassable line.
Here are associations whose ties go over, and under, and through it,
a meeting of merchants, a military corps, a college-class, a
fire-club, a professional association, a political, a religious
convention; -- the persons seem to draw inseparably near; yet, that
assembly once dispersed, its members will not in the year meet again.
Each returns to his degree in the scale of good society, porcelain
remains porcelain, and earthen earthen.  The objects of fashion may
be frivolous, or fashion may be objectless, but the nature of this
union and selection can be neither frivolous nor accidental.  Each
man's rank in that perfect graduation depends on some symmetry in his
structure, or some agreement in his structure to the symmetry of
society.  Its doors unbar instantaneously to a natural claim of their
own kind.  A natural gentleman finds his way in, and will keep the
oldest patrician out, who has lost his intrinsic rank.  Fashion
understands itself; good-breeding and personal superiority of
whatever country readily fraternize with those of every other.  The
chiefs of savage tribes have distinguished themselves in London and
Paris, by the purity of their tournure.

        To say what good of fashion we can, -- it rests on reality, and
hates nothing so much as pretenders; -- to exclude and mystify
pretenders, and send them into everlasting `Coventry,' is its
delight.  We contemn, in turn, every other gift of men of the world;
but the habit even in little and the least matters, of not appealing
to any but our own sense of propriety, constitutes the foundation of
all chivalry.  There is almost no kind of self-reliance, so it be
sane and proportioned, which fashion does not occasionally adopt, and
give it the freedom of its saloons.  A sainted soul is always
elegant, and, if it will, passes unchallenged into the most guarded
ring.  But so will Jock the teamster pass, in some crisis that brings
him thither, and find favor, as long as his head is not giddy with
the new circumstance, and the iron shoes do not wish to dance in
waltzes and cotillons.  For there is nothing settled in manners, but
the laws of behavior yield to the energy of the individual.  The
maiden at her first ball, the country-man at a city dinner, believes
that there is a ritual according to which every act and compliment
must be performed, or the failing party must be cast out of this
presence.  Later, they learn that good sense and character make their
own forms every moment, and speak or abstain, take wine or refuse it,
stay or go, sit in a chair or sprawl with children on the floor, or
stand on their head, or what else soever, in a new and aboriginal
way: and that strong will is always in fashion, let who will be
unfashionable.  All that fashion demands is composure, and
self-content.  A circle of men perfectly well-bred would be a company
of sensible persons, in which every man's native manners and
character appeared.  If the fashionist have not this quality, he is
nothing.  We are such lovers of self-reliance, that we excuse in a
man many sins, if he will show us a complete satisfaction in his
position, which asks no leave to be, of mine, or any man's good
opinion.  But any deference to some eminent man or woman of the
world, forfeits all privilege of nobility.  He is an underling: I
have nothing to do with him; I will speak with his master.  A man
should not go where he cannot carry his whole sphere or society with
him, -- not bodily, the whole circle of his friends, but
atmospherically.  He should preserve in a new company the same
attitude of mind and reality of relation, which his daily associates
draw him to, else he is shorn of his best beams, and will be an
orphan in the merriest club.  "If you could see Vich Ian Vohr with
his tail on!----" But Vich Ian Vohr must always carry his belongings
in some fashion, if not added as honor, then severed as disgrace.

        There will always be in society certain persons who are
mercuries of its approbation, and whose glance will at any time
determine for the curious their standing in the world.  These are the
chamberlains of the lesser gods.  Accept their coldness as an omen of
grace with the loftier deities, and allow them all their privilege.
They are clear in their office, nor could they be thus formidable,
without their own merits.  But do not measure the importance of this
class by their pretension, or imagine that a fop can be the dispenser
of honor and shame.  They pass also at their just rate; for how can
they otherwise, in circles which exist as a sort of herald's office
for the sifting of character?

        As the first thing man requires of man, is reality, so, that
appears in all the forms of society.  We pointedly, and by name,
introduce the parties to each other.  Know you before all heaven and
earth, that this is Andrew, and this is Gregory; -- they look each
other in the eye; they grasp each other's hand, to identify and
signalize each other.  It is a great satisfaction.  A gentleman never
dodges: his eyes look straight forward, and he assures the other
party, first of all, that he has been met.  For what is it that we
seek, in so many visits and hospitalities?  Is it your draperies,
pictures, and decorations?  Or, do we not insatiably ask, Was a man
in the house?  I may easily go into a great household where there is
much substance, excellent provision for comfort, luxury, and taste,
and yet not encounter there any Amphitryon, who shall subordinate
these appendages.  I may go into a cottage, and find a farmer who
feels that he is the man I have come to see, and fronts me
accordingly.  It was therefore a very natural point of old feudal
etiquette, that a gentleman who received a visit, though it were of
his sovereign, should not leave his roof, but should wait his arrival
at the door of his house.  No house, though it were the Thuilleries,
or the Escurial, is good for anything without a master.  And yet we
are not often gratified by this hospitality.  Every body we know
surrounds himself with a fine house, fine books, conservatory,
gardens, equipage, and all manner of toys, as screens to interpose
between himself and his guest.  Does it not seem as if man was of a
very sly, elusive nature, and dreaded nothing so much as a full
rencontre front to front with his fellow?  It were unmerciful, I
know, quite to abolish the use of these screens, which are of eminent
convenience, whether the guest is too great, or too little.  We call
together many friends who keep each other in play, or, by luxuries
and ornaments we amuse the young people, and guard our retirement.
Or if, perchance, a searching realist comes to our gate, before whose
eye we have no care to stand, then again we run to our curtain, and
hide ourselves as Adam at the voice of the Lord God in the garden.
Cardinal Caprara, the Pope's legate at Paris, defended himself from
the glances of Napoleon, by an immense pair of green spectacles.
Napoleon remarked them, and speedily managed to rally them off: and
yet Napoleon, in his turn, was not great enough with eight hundred
thousand troops at his back, to face a pair of freeborn eyes, but
fenced himself with etiquette, and within triple barriers of reserve:
and, as all the world knows from Madame de Stael, was wont, when he
found himself observed, to discharge his face of all expression.  But
emperors and rich men are by no means the most skilful masters of
good manners.  No rentroll nor army-list can dignify skulking and
dissimulation: and the first point of courtesy must always be truth,
as really all the forms of good-breeding point that way.

        I have just been reading, in Mr. Hazlitt's translation,
Montaigne's account of his journey into Italy, and am struck with
nothing more agreeably than the self-respecting fashions of the time.
His arrival in each place, the arrival of a gentleman of France, is
an event of some consequence.  Wherever he goes, he pays a visit to
whatever prince or gentleman of note resides upon his road, as a duty
to himself and to civilization.  When he leaves any house in which he
has lodged for a few weeks, he causes his arms to be painted and hung
up as a perpetual sign to the house, as was the custom of gentlemen.

        The complement of this graceful self-respect, and that of all
the points of good breeding I most require and insist upon, is
deference.  I like that every chair should be a throne, and hold a
king.  I prefer a tendency to stateliness, to an excess of
fellowship.  Let the incommunicable objects of nature and the
metaphysical isolation of man teach us independence.  Let us not be
too much acquainted.  I would have a man enter his house through a
hall filled with heroic and sacred sculptures, that he might not want
the hint of tranquillity and self-poise.  We should meet each
morning, as from foreign countries, and spending the day together,
should depart at night, as into foreign countries.  In all things I
would have the island of a man inviolate.  Let us sit apart as the
gods, talking from peak to peak all round Olympus.  No degree of
affection need invade this religion.  This is myrrh and rosemary to
keep the other sweet.  Lovers should guard their strangeness.  If
they forgive too much, all slides into confusion and meanness.  It is
easy to push this deference to a Chinese etiquette; but coolness and
absence of heat and haste indicate fine qualities.  A gentleman makes
no noise: a lady is serene.  Proportionate is our disgust at those
invaders who fill a studious house with blast and running, to secure
some paltry convenience.  Not less I dislike a low sympathy of each
with his neighbor's needs.  Must we have a good understanding with
one another's palates? as foolish people who have lived long
together, know when each wants salt or sugar.  I pray my companion,
if he wishes for bread, to ask me for bread, and if he wishes for
sassafras or arsenic, to ask me for them, and not to hold out his
plate, as if I knew already.  Every natural function can be dignified
by deliberation and privacy.  Let us leave hurry to slaves.  The
compliments and ceremonies of our breeding should signify, however
remotely, the recollection of the grandeur of our destiny.

        The flower of courtesy does not very well bide handling, but if
we dare to open another leaf, and explore what parts go to its
conformation, we shall find also an intellectual quality.  To the
leaders of men, the brain as well as the flesh and the heart must
furnish a proportion.  Defect in manners is usually the defect of
fine perceptions.  Men are too coarsely made for the delicacy of
beautiful carriage and customs.  It is not quite sufficient to
good-breeding, a union of kindness and independence.  We imperatively
require a perception of, and a homage to beauty in our companions.
Other virtues are in request in the field and workyard, but a certain
degree of taste is not to be spared in those we sit with.  I could
better eat with one who did not respect the truth or the laws, than
with a sloven and unpresentable person.  Moral qualities rule the
world, but at short distances, the senses are despotic.  The same
discrimination of fit and fair runs out, if with less rigor, into all
parts of life.  The average spirit of the energetic class is good
sense, acting under certain limitations and to certain ends.  It
entertains every natural gift.  Social in its nature, it respects
everything which tends to unite men.  It delights in measure.  The
love of beauty is mainly the love of measure or proportion.  The
person who screams, or uses the superlative degree, or converses with
heat, puts whole drawing-rooms to flight.  If you wish to be loved,
love measure.  You must have genius, or a prodigious usefulness, if
you will hide the want of measure.  This perception comes in to
polish and perfect the parts of the social instrument.  Society will
pardon much to genius and special gifts, but, being in its nature a
convention, it loves what is conventional, or what belongs to coming
together.  That makes the good and bad of manners, namely, what helps
or hinders fellowship.  For, fashion is not good sense absolute, but
relative; not good sense private, but good sense entertaining
company.  It hates corners and sharp points of character, hates
quarrelsome, egotistical, solitary, and gloomy people; hates whatever
can interfere with total blending of parties; whilst it values all
peculiarities as in the highest degree refreshing, which can consist
with good fellowship.  And besides the general infusion of wit to
heighten civility, the direct splendor of intellectual power is ever
welcome in fine society as the costliest addition to its rule and its
credit.

        The dry light must shine in to adorn our festival, but it must
be tempered and shaded, or that will also offend.  Accuracy is
essential to beauty, and quick perceptions to politeness, but not too
quick perceptions.  One may be too punctual and too precise.  He must
leave the omniscience of business at the door, when he comes into the
palace of beauty.  Society loves creole natures, and sleepy,
languishing manners, so that they cover sense, grace, and good-will;
the air of drowsy strength, which disarms criticism; perhaps, because
such a person seems to reserve himself for the best of the game, and
not spend himself on surfaces; an ignoring eye, which does not see
the annoyances, shifts, and inconveniences, that cloud the brow and
smother the voice of the sensitive.

        Therefore, besides personal force and so much perception as
constitutes unerring taste, society demands in its patrician class,
another element already intimated, which it significantly terms
good-nature, expressing all degrees of generosity, from the lowest
willingness and faculty to oblige, up to the heights of magnanimity
and love.  Insight we must have, or we shall run against one another,
and miss the way to our food; but intellect is selfish and barren.
The secret of success in society, is a certain heartiness and
sympathy.  A man who is not happy in the company, cannot find any
word in his memory that will fit the occasion.  All his information
is a little impertinent.  A man who is happy there, finds in every
turn of the conversation equally lucky occasions for the introduction
of that which he has to say.  The favorites of society, and what it
calls _whole souls_, are able men, and of more spirit than wit, who
have no uncomfortable egotism, but who exactly fill the hour and the
company, contented and contenting, at a marriage or a funeral, a ball
or a jury, a water-party or a shooting-match.  England, which is rich
in gentlemen, furnished, in the beginning of the present century, a
good model of that genius which the world loves, in Mr.  Fox, who
added to his great abilities the most social disposition, and real
love of men.  Parliamentary history has few better passages than the
debate, in which Burke and Fox separated in the House of Commons;
when Fox urged on his old friend the claims of old friendship with
such tenderness, that the house was moved to tears.  Another anecdote
is so close to my matter, that I must hazard the story.  A tradesman
who had long dunned him for a note of three hundred guineas, found
him one day counting gold, and demanded payment: "No," said Fox, "I
owe this money to Sheridan: it is a debt of honor: if an accident
should happen to me, he has nothing to show." "Then," said the
creditor, "I change my debt into a debt of honor," and tore the note
in pieces.  Fox thanked the man for his confidence, and paid him,
saying, "his debt was of older standing, and Sheridan must wait."
Lover of liberty, friend of the Hindoo, friend of the African slave,
he possessed a great personal popularity; and Napoleon said of him on
the occasion of his visit to Paris, in 1805, "Mr. Fox will always
hold the first place in an assembly at the Thuilleries."

        We may easily seem ridiculous in our eulogy of courtesy,
whenever we insist on benevolence as its foundation.  The painted
phantasm Fashion rises to cast a species of derision on what we say.
But I will neither be driven from some allowance to Fashion as a
symbolic institution, nor from the belief that love is the basis of
courtesy.  We must obtain _that_, if we can; but by all means we must
affirm _this_.  Life owes much of its spirit to these sharp
contrasts.  Fashion which affects to be honor, is often, in all men's
experience, only a ballroom-code.  Yet, so long as it is the highest
circle, in the imagination of the best heads on the planet, there is
something necessary and excellent in it; for it is not to be supposed
that men have agreed to be the dupes of anything preposterous; and
the respect which these mysteries inspire in the most rude and sylvan
characters, and the curiosity with which details of high life are
read, betray the universality of the love of cultivated manners.  I
know that a comic disparity would be felt, if we should enter the
acknowledged `first circles,' and apply these terrific standards of
justice, beauty, and benefit, to the individuals actually found
there.  Monarchs and heroes, sages and lovers, these gallants are
not.  Fashion has many classes and many rules of probation and
admission; and not the best alone.  There is not only the right of
conquest, which genius pretends, -- the individual, demonstrating his
natural aristocracy best of the best; -- but less claims will pass
for the time; for Fashion loves lions, and points, like Circe, to her
horned company.  This gentleman is this afternoon arrived from
Denmark; and that is my Lord Ride, who came yesterday from Bagdat;
here is Captain Friese, from Cape Turnagain; and Captain Symmes, from
the interior of the earth; and Monsieur Jovaire, who came down this
morning in a balloon; Mr. Hobnail, the reformer; and Reverend Jul
Bat, who has converted the whole torrid zone in his Sunday school;
and Signor Torre del Greco, who extinguished Vesuvius by pouring into
it the Bay of Naples; Spahi, the Persian ambassador; and Tul Wil
Shan, the exiled nabob of Nepaul, whose saddle is the new moon.  --
But these are monsters of one day, and tomorrow will be dismissed to
their holes and dens; for, in these rooms, every chair is waited for.
The artist, the scholar, and, in general, the clerisy, wins its way
up into these places, and gets represented here, somewhat on this
footing of conquest.  Another mode is to pass through all the
degrees, spending a year and a day in St. Michael's Square, being
steeped in Cologne water, and perfumed, and dined, and introduced,
and properly grounded in all the biography, and politics, and
anecdotes of the boudoirs.

        Yet these fineries may have grace and wit.  Let there be
grotesque sculpture about the gates and offices of temples.  Let the
creed and commandments even have the saucy homage of parody.  The
forms of politeness universally express benevolence in superlative
degrees.  What if they are in the mouths of selfish men, and used as
means of selfishness?  What if the false gentleman almost bows the
true out of the world?  What if the false gentleman contrives so to
address his companion, as civilly to exclude all others from his
discourse, and also to make them feel excluded?  Real service will
not lose its nobleness.  All generosity is not merely French and
sentimental; nor is it to be concealed, that living blood and a
passion of kindness does at last distinguish God's gentleman from
Fashion's.  The epitaph of Sir Jenkin Grout is not wholly
unintelligible to the present age.  "Here lies Sir Jenkin Grout, who
loved his friend, and persuaded his enemy: what his mouth ate, his
hand paid for: what his servants robbed, he restored: if a woman gave
him pleasure, he supported her in pain: he never forgot his children:
and whoso touched his finger, drew after it his whole body." Even the
line of heroes is not utterly extinct.  There is still ever some
admirable person in plain clothes, standing on the wharf, who jumps
in to rescue a drowning man; there is still some absurd inventor of
charities; some guide and comforter of runaway slaves; some friend of
Poland; some Philhellene; some fanatic who plants shade-trees for the
second and third generation, and orchards when he is grown old; some
well-concealed piety; some just man happy in an ill-fame; some youth
ashamed of the favors of fortune, and impatiently casting them on
other shoulders.  And these are the centres of society, on which it
returns for fresh impulses.  These are the creators of Fashion, which
is an attempt to organize beauty of behavior.  The beautiful and the
generous are, in the theory, the doctors and apostles of this church:
Scipio, and the Cid, and Sir Philip Sidney, and Washington, and every
pure and valiant heart, who worshipped Beauty by word and by deed.
The persons who constitute the natural aristocracy, are not found in
the actual aristocracy, or, only on its edge; as the chemical energy
of the spectrum is found to be greatest just outside of the spectrum.
Yet that is the infirmity of the seneschals, who do not know their
sovereign, when he appears.  The theory of society supposes the
existence and sovereignty of these.  It divines afar off their
coming.  It says with the elder gods, --

        "As Heaven and Earth are fairer far
        Than Chaos and blank Darkness, though once chiefs;
        And as we show beyond that Heaven and Earth,
        In form and shape compact and beautiful;
        So, on our heels a fresh perfection treads;
        A power, more strong in beauty, born of us,
        And fated to excel us, as we pass
        In glory that old Darkness:
        -------- for, 't is the eternal law,
        That first in beauty shall be first in might."

        Therefore, within the ethnical circle of good society, there is
a narrower and higher circle, concentration of its light, and flower
of courtesy, to which there is always a tacit appeal of pride and
reference, as to its inner and imperial court, the parliament of love
and chivalry.  And this is constituted of those persons in whom
heroic dispositions are native, with the love of beauty, the delight
in society, and the power to embellish the passing day.  If the
individuals who compose the purest circles of aristocracy in Europe,
the guarded blood of centuries, should pass in review, in such manner
as that we could, at leisure, and critically inspect their behavior,
we might find no gentleman, and no lady; for, although excellent
specimens of courtesy and high-breeding would gratify us in the
assemblage, in the particulars, we should detect offence.  Because,
elegance comes of no breeding, but of birth.  There must be romance
of character, or the most fastidious exclusion of impertinencies will
not avail.  It must be genius which takes that direction: it must be
not courteous, but courtesy.  High behavior is as rare in fiction, as
it is in fact.  Scott is praised for the fidelity with which he
painted the demeanor and conversation of the superior classes.
Certainly, kings and queens, nobles and great ladies, had some right
to complain of the absurdity that had been put in their mouths,
before the days of Waverley; but neither does Scott's dialogue bear
criticism.  His lords brave each other in smart epigramatic speeches,
but the dialogue is in costume, and does not please on the second
reading: it is not warm with life.  In Shakspeare alone, the speakers
do not strut and bridle, the dialogue is easily great, and he adds to
so many titles that of being the best-bred man in England, and in
Christendom.  Once or twice in a lifetime we are permitted to enjoy
the charm of noble manners, in the presence of a man or woman who
have no bar in their nature, but whose character emanates freely in
their word and gesture.  A beautiful form is better than a beautiful
face; a beautiful behavior is better than a beautiful form: it gives
a higher pleasure than statues or pictures; it is the finest of the
fine arts.  A man is but a little thing in the midst of the objects
of nature, yet, by the moral quality radiating from his countenance,
he may abolish all considerations of magnitude, and in his manners
equal the majesty of the world.  I have seen an individual, whose
manners, though wholly within the conventions of elegant society,
were never learned there, but were original and commanding, and held
out protection and prosperity; one who did not need the aid of a
court-suit, but carried the holiday in his eye; who exhilarated the
fancy by flinging wide the doors of new modes of existence; who shook
off the captivity of etiquette, with happy, spirited bearing,
good-natured and free as Robin Hood; yet with the port of an emperor,
-- if need be, calm, serious, and fit to stand the gaze of millions.

        The open air and the fields, the street and public chambers,
are the places where Man executes his will; let him yield or divide
the sceptre at the door of the house.  Woman, with her instinct of
behavior, instantly detects in man a love of trifles, any coldness or
imbecility, or, in short, any want of that large, flowing, and
magnanimous deportment, which is indispensable as an exterior in the
hall.  Our American institutions have been friendly to her, and at
this moment, I esteem it a chief felicity of this country, that it
excels in women.  A certain awkward consciousness of inferiority in
the men, may give rise to the new chivalry in behalf of Woman's
Rights.  Certainly, let her be as much better placed in the laws and
in social forms, as the most zealous reformer can ask, but I confide
so entirely in her inspiring and musical nature, that I believe only
herself can show us how she shall be served.  The wonderful
generosity of her sentiments raises her at times into heroical and
godlike regions, and verifies the pictures of Minerva, Juno, or
Polymnia; and, by the firmness with which she treads her upward path,
she convinces the coarsest calculators that another road exists, than
that which their feet know.  But besides those who make good in our
imagination the place of muses and of Delphic Sibyls, are there not
women who fill our vase with wine and roses to the brim, so that the
wine runs over and fills the house with perfume; who inspire us with
courtesy; who unloose our tongues, and we speak; who anoint our eyes,
and we see?  We say things we never thought to have said; for once,
our walls of habitual reserve vanished, and left us at large; we were
children playing with children in a wide field of flowers.  Steep us,
we cried, in these influences, for days, for weeks, and we shall be
sunny poets, and will write out in many-colored words the romance
that you are.  Was it Hafiz or Firdousi that said of his Persian
Lilla, She was an elemental force, and astonished me by her amount of
life, when I saw her day after day radiating, every instant,
redundant joy and grace on all around her.  She was a solvent
powerful to reconcile all heterogeneous persons into one society:
like air or water, an element of such a great range of affinities,
that it combines readily with a thousand substances.  Where she is
present, all others will be more than they are wont.  She was a unit
and whole, so that whatsoever she did, became her.  She had too much
sympathy and desire to please, than that you could say, her manners
were marked with dignity, yet no princess could surpass her clear and
erect demeanor on each occasion.  She did not study the Persian
grammar, nor the books of the seven poets, but all the poems of the
seven seemed to be written upon her.  For, though the bias of her
nature was not to thought, but to sympathy, yet was she so perfect in
her own nature, as to meet intellectual persons by the fulness of her
heart, warming them by her sentiments; believing, as she did, that by
dealing nobly with all, all would show themselves noble.

        I know that this Byzantine pile of chivalry or Fashion, which
seems so fair and picturesque to those who look at the contemporary
facts for science or for entertainment, is not equally pleasant to
all spectators.  The constitution of our society makes it a giant's
castle to the ambitious youth who have not found their names enrolled
in its Golden Book, and whom it has excluded from its coveted honors
and privileges.  They have yet to learn that its seeming grandeur is
shadowy and relative: it is great by their allowance: its proudest
gates will fly open at the approach of their courage and virtue.  For
the present distress, however, of those who are predisposed to suffer
from the tyrannies of this caprice, there are easy remedies.  To
remove your residence a couple of miles, or at most four, will
commonly relieve the most extreme susceptibility.  For, the
advantages which fashion values, are plants which thrive in very
confined localities, in a few streets, namely.  Out of this precinct,
they go for nothing; are of no use in the farm, in the forest, in the
market, in war, in the nuptial society, in the literary or scientific
circle, at sea, in friendship, in the heaven of thought or virtue.

        But we have lingered long enough in these painted courts.  The
worth of the thing signified must vindicate our taste for the emblem.
Everything that is called fashion and courtesy humbles itself before
the cause and fountain of honor, creator of titles and dignities,
namely, the heart of love.  This is the royal blood, this the fire,
which, in all countries and contingencies, will work after its kind,
and conquer and expand all that approaches it.  This gives new
meanings to every fact.  This impoverishes the rich, suffering no
grandeur but its own.  What _is_ rich?  Are you rich enough to help
anybody? to succor the unfashionable and the eccentric? rich enough
to make the Canadian in his wagon, the itinerant with his consul's
paper which commends him "To the charitable," the swarthy Italian
with his few broken words of English, the lame pauper hunted by
overseers from town to town, even the poor insane or besotted wreck
of man or woman, feel the noble exception of your presence and your
house, from the general bleakness and stoniness; to make such feel
that they were greeted with a voice which made them both remember and
hope?  What is vulgar, but to refuse the claim on acute and
conclusive reasons?  What is gentle, but to allow it, and give their
heart and yours one holiday from the national caution?  Without the
rich heart, wealth is an ugly beggar.  The king of Schiraz could not
afford to be so bountiful as the poor Osman who dwelt at his gate.
Osman had a humanity so broad and deep, that although his speech was
so bold and free with the Koran, as to disgust all the dervishes, yet
was there never a poor outcast, eccentric, or insane man, some fool
who had cut off his beard, or who had been mutilated under a vow, or
had a pet madness in his brain, but fled at once to him, -- that
great heart lay there so sunny and hospitable in the centre of the
country, -- that it seemed as if the instinct of all sufferers drew
them to his side.  And the madness which he harbored, he did not
share.  Is not this to be rich? this only to be rightly rich?

        But I shall hear without pain, that I play the courtier very
ill, and talk of that which I do not well understand.  It is easy to
see, that what is called by distinction society and fashion, has good
laws as well as bad, has much that is necessary, and much that is
absurd.  Too good for banning, and too bad for blessing, it reminds
us of a tradition of the pagan mythology, in any attempt to settle
its character.  `I overheard Jove, one day,' said Silenus, `talking
of destroying the earth; he said, it had failed; they were all rogues
and vixens, who went from bad to worse, as fast as the days succeeded
each other.  Minerva said, she hoped not; they were only ridiculous
little creatures, with this odd circumstance, that they had a blur,
or indeterminate aspect, seen far or seen near; if you called them
bad, they would appear so; if you called them good, they would appear
so; and there was no one person or action among them, which would not
puzzle her owl, much more all Olympus, to know whether it was
fundamentally bad or good.'

 
 
        GIFTS
 
 
        Gifts of one who loved me, --
        'T was high time they came;
        When he ceased to love me,
        Time they stopped for shame.

 

        ESSAY V _Gifts_
 
        It is said that the world is in a state of bankruptcy, that the
world owes the world more than the world can pay, and ought to go
into chancery, and be sold.  I do not think this general insolvency,
which involves in some sort all the population, to be the reason of
the difficulty experienced at Christmas and New Year, and other
times, in bestowing gifts; since it is always so pleasant to be
generous, though very vexatious to pay debts.  But the impediment
lies in the choosing.  If, at any time, it comes into my head, that a
present is due from me to somebody, I am puzzled what to give, until
the opportunity is gone.  Flowers and fruits are always fit presents;
flowers, because they are a proud assertion that a ray of beauty
outvalues all the utilities of the world.  These gay natures contrast
with the somewhat stern countenance of ordinary nature: they are like
music heard out of a work-house.  Nature does not cocker us: we are
children, not pets: she is not fond: everything is dealt to us
without fear or favor, after severe universal laws.  Yet these
delicate flowers look like the frolic and interference of love and
beauty.  Men use to tell us that we love flattery, even though we are
not deceived by it, because it shows that we are of importance enough
to be courted.  Something like that pleasure, the flowers give us:
what am I to whom these sweet hints are addressed?  Fruits are
acceptable gifts, because they are the flower of commodities, and
admit of fantastic values being attached to them.  If a man should
send to me to come a hundred miles to visit him, and should set
before me a basket of fine summerfruit, I should think there was some
proportion between the labor and the reward.

        For common gifts, necessity makes pertinences and beauty every
day, and one is glad when an imperative leaves him no option, since
if the man at the door have no shoes, you have not to consider
whether you could procure him a paint-box.  And as it is always
pleasing to see a man eat bread, or drink water, in the house or out
of doors, so it is always a great satisfaction to supply these first
wants.  Necessity does everything well.  In our condition of
universal dependence, it seems heroic to let the petitioner be the
judge of his necessity, and to give all that is asked, though at
great inconvenience.  If it be a fantastic desire, it is better to
leave to others the office of punishing him.  I can think of many
parts I should prefer playing to that of the Furies.  Next to things
of necessity, the rule for a gift, which one of my friends
prescribed, is, that we might convey to some person that which
properly belonged to his character, and was easily associated with
him in thought.  But our tokens of compliment and love are for the
most part barbarous.  Rings and other jewels are not gifts, but
apologies for gifts.  The only gift is a portion of thyself.  Thou
must bleed for me.  Therefore the poet brings his poem; the shepherd,
his lamb; the farmer, corn; the miner, a gem; the sailor, coral and
shells; the painter, his picture; the girl, a handkerchief of her own
sewing.  This is right and pleasing, for it restores society in so
far to its primary basis, when a man's biography is conveyed in his
gift, and every man's wealth is an index of his merit.  But it is a
cold, lifeless business when you go to the shops to buy me something,
which does not represent your life and talent, but a goldsmith's.
This is fit for kings, and rich men who represent kings, and a false
state of property, to make presents of gold and silver stuffs, as a
kind of symbolical sin-offering, or payment of black-mail.

        The law of benefits is a difficult channel, which requires
careful sailing, or rude boats.  It is not the office of a man to
receive gifts.  How dare you give them?  We wish to be
self-sustained.  We do not quite forgive a giver.  The hand that
feeds us is in some danger of being bitten.  We can receive anything
from love, for that is a way of receiving it from ourselves; but not
from any one who assumes to bestow.  We sometimes hate the meat which
we eat, because there seems something of degrading dependence in
living by it.

        "Brother, if Jove to thee a present make,
        Take heed that from his hands thou nothing take."
 
        We ask the whole.  Nothing less will content us.  We arraign
society, if it do not give us besides earth, and fire, and water,
opportunity, love, reverence, and objects of veneration.

        He is a good man, who can receive a gift well.  We are either
glad or sorry at a gift, and both emotions are unbecoming.  Some
violence, I think, is done, some degradation borne, when I rejoice or
grieve at a gift.  I am sorry when my independence is invaded, or
when a gift comes from such as do not know my spirit, and so the act
is not supported; and if the gift pleases me overmuch, then I should
be ashamed that the donor should read my heart, and see that I love
his commodity, and not him.  The gift, to be true, must be the
flowing of the giver unto me, correspondent to my flowing unto him.
When the waters are at level, then my goods pass to him, and his to
me.  All his are mine, all mine his.  I say to him, How can you give
me this pot of oil, or this flagon of wine, when all your oil and
wine is mine, which belief of mine this gift seems to deny?  Hence
the fitness of beautiful, not useful things for gifts.  This giving
is flat usurpation, and therefore when the beneficiary is ungrateful,
as all beneficiaries hate all Timons, not at all considering the
value of the gift, but looking back to the greater store it was taken
from, I rather sympathize with the beneficiary, than with the anger
of my lord Timon.  For, the expectation of gratitude is mean, and is
continually punished by the total insensibility of the obliged
person.  It is a great happiness to get off without injury and
heart-burning, from one who has had the ill luck to be served by you.
It is a very onerous business, this of being served, and the debtor
naturally wishes to give you a slap.  A golden text for these
gentlemen is that which I so admire in the Buddhist, who never
thanks, and who says, "Do not flatter your benefactors."

        The reason of these discords I conceive to be, that there is no
commensurability between a man and any gift.  You cannot give
anything to a magnanimous person.  After you have served him, he at
once puts you in debt by his magnanimity.  The service a man renders
his friend is trivial and selfish, compared with the service he knows
his friend stood in readiness to yield him, alike before he had begun
to serve his friend, and now also.  Compared with that good-will I
bear my friend, the benefit it is in my power to render him seems
small.  Besides, our action on each other, good as well as evil, is
so incidental and at random, that we can seldom hear the
acknowledgments of any person who would thank us for a benefit,
without some shame and humiliation.  We can rarely strike a direct
stroke, but must be content with an oblique one; we seldom have the
satisfaction of yielding a direct benefit, which is directly
received.  But rectitude scatters favors on every side without
knowing it, and receives with wonder the thanks of all people.

        I fear to breathe any treason against the majesty of love,
which is the genius and god of gifts, and to whom we must not affect
to prescribe.  Let him give kingdoms or flower-leaves indifferently.
There are persons, from whom we always expect fairy tokens; let us
not cease to expect them.  This is prerogative, and not to be limited
by our municipal rules.  For the rest, I like to see that we cannot
be bought and sold.  The best of hospitality and of generosity is
also not in the will, but in fate.  I find that I am not much to you;
you do not need me; you do not feel me; then am I thrust out of
doors, though you proffer me house and lands.  No services are of any
value, but only likeness.  When I have attempted to join myself to
others by services, it proved an intellectual trick, -- no more.
They eat your service like apples, and leave you out.  But love them,
and they feel you, and delight in you all the time.

 
 
        NATURE
 
 
        The rounded world is fair to see,
        Nine times folded in mystery:
        Though baffled seers cannot impart
        The secret of its laboring heart,
        Throb thine with Nature's throbbing breast,
        And all is clear from east to west.
        Spirit that lurks each form within
        Beckons to spirit of its kin;
        Self-kindled every atom glows,
        And hints the future which it owes.

 
 
        Essay VI _Nature_
 
        There are days which occur in this climate, at almost any
season of the year, wherein the world reaches its perfection, when
the air, the heavenly bodies, and the earth, make a harmony, as if
nature would indulge her offspring; when, in these bleak upper sides
of the planet, nothing is to desire that we have heard of the
happiest latitudes, and we bask in the shining hours of Florida and
Cuba; when everything that has life gives sign of satisfaction, and
the cattle that lie on the ground seem to have great and tranquil
thoughts.  These halcyons may be looked for with a little more
assurance in that pure October weather, which we distinguish by the
name of the Indian Summer.  The day, immeasurably long, sleeps over
the broad hills and warm wide fields.  To have lived through all its
sunny hours, seems longevity enough.  The solitary places do not seem
quite lonely.  At the gates of the forest, the surprised man of the
world is forced to leave his city estimates of great and small, wise
and foolish.  The knapsack of custom falls off his back with the
first step he makes into these precincts.  Here is sanctity which
shames our religions, and reality which discredits our heroes.  Here
we find nature to be the circumstance which dwarfs every other
circumstance, and judges like a god all men that come to her.  We
have crept out of our close and crowded houses into the night and
morning, and we see what majestic beauties daily wrap us in their
bosom.  How willingly we would escape the barriers which render them
comparatively impotent, escape the sophistication and second thought,
and suffer nature to intrance us.  The tempered light of the woods is
like a perpetual morning, and is stimulating and heroic.  The
anciently reported spells of these places creep on us.  The stems of
pines, hemlocks, and oaks, almost gleam like iron on the excited eye.
The incommunicable trees begin to persuade us to live with them, and
quit our life of solemn trifles.  Here no history, or church, or
state, is interpolated on the divine sky and the immortal year.  How
easily we might walk onward into the opening landscape, absorbed by
new pictures, and by thoughts fast succeeding each other, until by
degrees the recollection of home was crowded out of the mind, all
memory obliterated by the tyranny of the present, and we were led in
triumph by nature.

        These enchantments are medicinal, they sober and heal us.
These are plain pleasures, kindly and native to us.  We come to our
own, and make friends with matter, which the ambitious chatter of the
schools would persuade us to despise.  We never can part with it; the
mind loves its old home: as water to our thirst, so is the rock, the
ground, to our eyes, and hands, and feet.  It is firm water: it is
cold flame: what health, what affinity!  Ever an old friend, ever
like a dear friend and brother, when we chat affectedly with
strangers, comes in this honest face, and takes a grave liberty with
us, and shames us out of our nonsense.  Cities give not the human
senses room enough.  We go out daily and nightly to feed the eyes on
the horizon, and require so much scope, just as we need water for our
bath.  There are all degrees of natural influence, from these
quarantine powers of nature, up to her dearest and gravest
ministrations to the imagination and the soul.  There is the bucket
of cold water from the spring, the wood-fire to which the chilled
traveller rushes for safety, -- and there is the sublime moral of
autumn and of noon.  We nestle in nature, and draw our living as
parasites from her roots and grains, and we receive glances from the
heavenly bodies, which call us to solitude, and foretell the remotest
future.  The blue zenith is the point in which romance and reality
meet.  I think, if we should be rapt away into all that we dream of
heaven, and should converse with Gabriel and Uriel, the upper sky
would be all that would remain of our furniture.

        It seems as if the day was not wholly profane, in which we have
given heed to some natural object.  The fall of snowflakes in a still
air, preserving to each crystal its perfect form; the blowing of
sleet over a wide sheet of water, and over plains, the waving
rye-field, the mimic waving of acres of houstonia, whose innumerable
florets whiten and ripple before the eye; the reflections of trees
and flowers in glassy lakes; the musical steaming odorous south wind,
which converts all trees to windharps; the crackling and spurting of
hemlock in the flames; or of pine logs, which yield glory to the
walls and faces in the sittingroom, -- these are the music and
pictures of the most ancient religion.  My house stands in low land,
with limited outlook, and on the skirt of the village.  But I go with
my friend to the shore of our little river, and with one stroke of
the paddle, I leave the village politics and personalities, yes, and
the world of villages and personalities behind, and pass into a
delicate realm of sunset and moonlight, too bright almost for spotted
man to enter without noviciate and probation.  We penetrate bodily
this incredible beauty; we dip our hands in this painted element: our
eyes are bathed in these lights and forms.  A holiday, a
villeggiatura, a royal revel, the proudest, most heart-rejoicing
festival that valor and beauty, power and taste, ever decked and
enjoyed, establishes itself on the instant.  These sunset clouds,
these delicately emerging stars, with their private and ineffable
glances, signify it and proffer it.  I am taught the poorness of our
invention, the ugliness of towns and palaces.  Art and luxury have
early learned that they must work as enhancement and sequel to this
original beauty.  I am over-instructed for my return.  Henceforth I
shall be hard to please.  I cannot go back to toys.  I am grown
expensive and sophisticated.  I can no longer live without elegance:
but a countryman shall be my master of revels.  He who knows the
most, he who knows what sweets and virtues are in the ground, the
waters, the plants, the heavens, and how to come at these
enchantments, is the rich and royal man.  Only as far as the masters
of the world have called in nature to their aid, can they reach the
height of magnificence.  This is the meaning of their
hanging-gardens, villas, garden-houses, islands, parks, and
preserves, to back their faulty personality with these strong
accessories.  I do not wonder that the landed interest should be
invincible in the state with these dangerous auxiliaries.  These
bribe and invite; not kings, not palaces, not men, not women, but
these tender and poetic stars, eloquent of secret promises.  We heard
what the rich man said, we knew of his villa, his grove, his wine,
and his company, but the provocation and point of the invitation came
out of these beguiling stars.  In their soft glances, I see what men
strove to realize in some Versailles, or Paphos, or Ctesiphon.
Indeed, it is the magical lights of the horizon, and the blue sky for
the background, which save all our works of art, which were otherwise
bawbles.  When the rich tax the poor with servility and
obsequiousness, they should consider the effect of men reputed to be
the possessors of nature, on imaginative minds.  Ah! if the rich were
rich as the poor fancy riches!  A boy hears a military band play on
the field at night, and he has kings and queens, and famous chivalry
palpably before him.  He hears the echoes of a horn in a hill
country, in the Notch Mountains, for example, which converts the
mountains into an Aeolian harp, and this supernatural _tiralira_
restores to him the Dorian mythology, Apollo, Diana, and all divine
hunters and huntresses.  Can a musical note be so lofty, so haughtily
beautiful!  To the poor young poet, thus fabulous is his picture of
society; he is loyal; he respects the rich; they are rich for the
sake of his imagination; how poor his fancy would be, if they were
not rich!  That they have some high-fenced grove, which they call a
park; that they live in larger and better-garnished saloons than he
has visited, and go in coaches, keeping only the society of the
elegant, to watering-places, and to distant cities, are the
groundwork from which he has delineated estates of romance, compared
with which their actual possessions are shanties and paddocks.  The
muse herself betrays her son, and enhances the gifts of wealth and
well-born beauty, by a radiation out of the air, and clouds, and
forests that skirt the road, -- a certain haughty favor, as if from
patrician genii to patricians, a kind of aristocracy in nature, a
prince of the power of the air.

        The moral sensibility which makes Edens and Tempes so easily,
may not be always found, but the material landscape is never far off.
We can find these enchantments without visiting the Como Lake, or the
Madeira Islands.  We exaggerate the praises of local scenery.  In
every landscape, the point of astonishment is the meeting of the sky
and the earth, and that is seen from the first hillock as well as
from the top of the Alleghanies.  The stars at night stoop down over
the brownest, homeliest common, with all the spiritual magnificence
which they shed on the Campagna, or on the marble deserts of Egypt.
The uprolled clouds and the colors of morning and evening, will
transfigure maples and alders.  The difference between landscape and
landscape is small, but there is great difference in the beholders.
There is nothing so wonderful in any particular landscape, as the
necessity of being beautiful under which every landscape lies.
Nature cannot be surprised in undress.  Beauty breaks in everywhere.

        But it is very easy to outrun the sympathy of readers on this
topic, which schoolmen called _natura naturata_, or nature passive.
One can hardly speak directly of it without excess.  It is as easy to
broach in mixed companies what is called "the subject of religion." A
susceptible person does not like to indulge his tastes in this kind,
without the apology of some trivial necessity: he goes to see a
wood-lot, or to look at the crops, or to fetch a plant or a mineral
from a remote locality, or he carries a fowling piece, or a
fishing-rod.  I suppose this shame must have a good reason.  A
dilettantism in nature is barren and unworthy.  The fop of fields is
no better than his brother of Broadway.  Men are naturally hunters
and inquisitive of wood-craft, and I suppose that such a gazetteer as
wood-cutters and Indians should furnish facts for, would take place
in the most sumptuous drawingrooms of all the "Wreaths" and "Flora's
chaplets" of the bookshops; yet ordinarily, whether we are too clumsy
for so subtle a topic, or from whatever cause, as soon as men begin
to write on nature, they fall into euphuism.  Frivolity is a most
unfit tribute to Pan, who ought to be represented in the mythology as
the most continent of gods.  I would not be frivolous before the
admirable reserve and prudence of time, yet I cannot renounce the
right of returning often to this old topic.  The multitude of false
churches accredits the true religion.  Literature, poetry, science,
are the homage of man to this unfathomed secret, concerning which no
sane man can affect an indifference or incuriosity.  Nature is loved
by what is best in us.  It is loved as the city of God, although, or
rather because there is no citizen.  The sunset is unlike anything
that is underneath it: it wants men.  And the beauty of nature must
always seem unreal and mocking, until the landscape has human
figures, that are as good as itself.  If there were good men, there
would never be this rapture in nature.  If the king is in the palace,
nobody looks at the walls.  It is when he is gone, and the house is
filled with grooms and gazers, that we turn from the people, to find
relief in the majestic men that are suggested by the pictures and the
architecture.  The critics who complain of the sickly separation of
the beauty of nature from the thing to be done, must consider that
our hunting of the picturesque is inseparable from our protest
against false society.  Man is fallen; nature is erect, and serves as
a differential thermometer, detecting the presence or absence of the
divine sentiment in man.  By fault of our dulness and selfishness, we
are looking up to nature, but when we are convalescent, nature will
look up to us.  We see the foaming brook with compunction: if our own
life flowed with the right energy, we should shame the brook.  The
stream of zeal sparkles with real fire, and not with reflex rays of
sun and moon.  Nature may be as selfishly studied as trade.
Astronomy to the selfish becomes astrology; psychology, mesmerism
(with intent to show where our spoons are gone); and anatomy and
physiology, become phrenology and palmistry.

        But taking timely warning, and leaving many things unsaid on
this topic, let us not longer omit our homage to the Efficient
Nature, _natura naturans_, the quick cause, before which all forms
flee as the driven snows, itself secret, its works driven before it
in flocks and multitudes, (as the ancient represented nature by
Proteus, a shepherd,) and in undescribable variety.  It publishes
itself in creatures, reaching from particles and spicula, through
transformation on transformation to the highest symmetries, arriving
at consummate results without a shock or a leap.  A little heat, that
is, a little motion, is all that differences the bald, dazzling
white, and deadly cold poles of the earth from the prolific tropical
climates.  All changes pass without violence, by reason of the two
cardinal conditions of boundless space and boundless time.  Geology
has initiated us into the secularity of nature, and taught us to
disuse our dame-school measures, and exchange our Mosaic and
Ptolemaic schemes for her large style.  We knew nothing rightly, for
want of perspective.  Now we learn what patient periods must round
themselves before the rock is formed, then before the rock is broken,
and the first lichen race has disintegrated the thinnest external
plate into soil, and opened the door for the remote Flora, Fauna,
Ceres, and Pomona, to come in.  How far off yet is the trilobite! how
far the quadruped! how inconceivably remote is man!  All duly arrive,
and then race after race of men.  It is a long way from granite to
the oyster; farther yet to Plato, and the preaching of the
immortality of the soul.  Yet all must come, as surely as the first
atom has two sides.

        Motion or change, and identity or rest, are the first and
second secrets of nature: Motion and Rest.  The whole code of her
laws may be written on the thumbnail, or the signet of a ring.  The
whirling bubble on the surface of a brook, admits us to the secret of
the mechanics of the sky.  Every shell on the beach is a key to it.
A little water made to rotate in a cup explains the formation of the
simpler shells; the addition of matter from year to year, arrives at
last at the most complex forms; and yet so poor is nature with all
her craft, that, from the beginning to the end of the universe, she
has but one stuff, -- but one stuff with its two ends, to serve up
all her dream-like variety.  Compound it how she will, star, sand,
fire, water, tree, man, it is still one stuff, and betrays the same
properties.

        Nature is always consistent, though she feigns to contravene
her own laws.  She keeps her laws, and seems to transcend them.  She
arms and equips an animal to find its place and living in the earth,
and, at the same time, she arms and equips another animal to destroy
it.  Space exists to divide creatures; but by clothing the sides of a
bird with a few feathers, she gives him a petty omnipresence.  The
direction is forever onward, but the artist still goes back for
materials, and begins again with the first elements on the most
advanced stage: otherwise, all goes to ruin.  If we look at her work,
we seem to catch a glance of a system in transition.  Plants are the
young of the world, vessels of health and vigor; but they grope ever
upward towards consciousness; the trees are imperfect men, and seem
to bemoan their imprisonment, rooted in the ground.  The animal is
the novice and probationer of a more advanced order.  The men, though
young, having tasted the first drop from the cup of thought, are
already dissipated: the maples and ferns are still uncorrupt; yet no
doubt, when they come to consciousness, they too will curse and
swear.  Flowers so strictly belong to youth, that we adult men soon
come to feel, that their beautiful generations concern not us: we
have had our day; now let the children have theirs.  The flowers jilt
us, and we are old bachelors with our ridiculous tenderness.

        Things are so strictly related, that according to the skill of
the eye, from any one object the parts and properties of any other
may be predicted.  If we had eyes to see it, a bit of stone from the
city wall would certify us of the necessity that man must exist, as
readily as the city.  That identity makes us all one, and reduces to
nothing great intervals on our customary scale.  We talk of
deviations from natural life, as if artificial life were not also
natural.  The smoothest curled courtier in the boudoirs of a palace
has an animal nature, rude and aboriginal as a white bear, omnipotent
to its own ends, and is directly related, there amid essences and
billetsdoux, to Himmaleh mountain-chains, and the axis of the globe.
If we consider how much we are nature's, we need not be superstitious
about towns, as if that terrific or benefic force did not find us
there also, and fashion cities.  Nature who made the mason, made the
house.  We may easily hear too much of rural influences.  The cool
disengaged air of natural objects, makes them enviable to us, chafed
and irritable creatures with red faces, and we think we shall be as
grand as they, if we camp out and eat roots; but let us be men
instead of woodchucks, and the oak and the elm shall gladly serve us,
though we sit in chairs of ivory on carpets of silk.

        This guiding identity runs through all the surprises and
contrasts of the piece, and characterizes every law.  Man carries the
world in his head, the whole astronomy and chemistry suspended in a
thought.  Because the history of nature is charactered in his brain,
therefore is he the prophet and discoverer of her secrets.  Every
known fact in natural science was divined by the presentiment of
somebody, before it was actually verified.  A man does not tie his
shoe without recognising laws which bind the farthest regions of
nature: moon, plant, gas, crystal, are concrete geometry and numbers.
Common sense knows its own, and recognises the fact at first sight in
chemical experiment.  The common sense of Franklin, Dalton, Davy, and
Black, is the same common sense which made the arrangements which now
it discovers.

        If the identity expresses organized rest, the counter action
runs also into organization.  The astronomers said, `Give us matter,
and a little motion, and we will construct the universe.  It is not
enough that we should have matter, we must also have a single
impulse, one shove to launch the mass, and generate the harmony of
the centrifugal and centripetal forces.  Once heave the ball from the
hand, and we can show how all this mighty order grew.' -- `A very
unreasonable postulate,' said the metaphysicians, `and a plain
begging of the question.  Could you not prevail to know the genesis
of projection, as well as the continuation of it?' Nature, meanwhile,
had not waited for the discussion, but, right or wrong, bestowed the
impulse, and the balls rolled.  It was no great affair, a mere push,
but the astronomers were right in making much of it, for there is no
end to the consequences of the act.  That famous aboriginal push
propagates itself through all the balls of the system, and through
every atom of every ball, through all the races of creatures, and
through the history and performances of every individual.
Exaggeration is in the course of things.  Nature sends no creature,
no man into the world, without adding a small excess of his proper
quality.  Given the planet, it is still necessary to add the impulse;
so, to every creature nature added a little violence of direction in
its proper path, a shove to put it on its way; in every instance, a
slight generosity, a drop too much.  Without electricity the air
would rot, and without this violence of direction, which men and
women have, without a spice of bigot and fanatic, no excitement, no
efficiency.  We aim above the mark, to hit the mark.  Every act hath
some falsehood of exaggeration in it.  And when now and then comes
along some sad, sharp-eyed man, who sees how paltry a game is played,
and refuses to play, but blabs the secret; -- how then? is the bird
flown?  O no, the wary Nature sends a new troop of fairer forms, of
lordlier youths, with a little more excess of direction to hold them
fast to their several aim; makes them a little wrongheaded in that
direction in which they are rightest, and on goes the game again with
new whirl, for a generation or two more.  The child with his sweet
pranks, the fool of his senses, commanded by every sight and sound,
without any power to compare and rank his sensations, abandoned to a
whistle or a painted chip, to a lead dragoon, or a gingerbread-dog,
individualizing everything, generalizing nothing, delighted with
every new thing, lies down at night overpowered by the fatigue, which
this day of continual pretty madness has incurred.  But Nature has
answered her purpose with the curly, dimpled lunatic.  She has tasked
every faculty, and has secured the symmetrical growth of the bodily
frame, by all these attitudes and exertions, -- an end of the first
importance, which could not be trusted to any care less perfect than
her own.  This glitter, this opaline lustre plays round the top of
every toy to his eye, to ensure his fidelity, and he is deceived to
his good.  We are made alive and kept alive by the same arts.  Let
the stoics say what they please, we do not eat for the good of
living, but because the meat is savory and the appetite is keen.  The
vegetable life does not content itself with casting from the flower
or the tree a single seed, but it fills the air and earth with a
prodigality of seeds, that, if thousands perish, thousands may plant
themselves, that hundreds may come up, that tens may live to
maturity, that, at least, one may replace the parent.  All things
betray the same calculated profusion.  The excess of fear with which
the animal frame is hedged round, shrinking from cold, starting at
sight of a snake, or at a sudden noise, protects us, through a
multitude of groundless alarms, from some one real danger at last.
The lover seeks in marriage his private felicity and perfection, with
no prospective end; and nature hides in his happiness her own end,
namely, progeny, or the perpetuity of the race.

        But the craft with which the world is made, runs also into the
mind and character of men.  No man is quite sane; each has a vein of
folly in his composition, a slight determination of blood to the
head, to make sure of holding him hard to some one point which nature
had taken to heart.  Great causes are never tried on their merits;
but the cause is reduced to particulars to suit the size of the
partizans, and the contention is ever hottest on minor matters.  Not
less remarkable is the overfaith of each man in the importance of
what he has to do or say.  The poet, the prophet, has a higher value
for what he utters than any hearer, and therefore it gets spoken.
The strong, self-complacent Luther declares with an emphasis, not to
be mistaken, that "God himself cannot do without wise men." Jacob
Behmen and George Fox betray their egotism in the pertinacity of
their controversial tracts, and James Naylor once suffered himself to
be worshipped as the Christ.  Each prophet comes presently to
identify himself with his thought, and to esteem his hat and shoes
sacred.  However this may discredit such persons with the judicious,
it helps them with the people, as it gives heat, pungency, and
publicity to their words.  A similar experience is not infrequent in
private life.  Each young and ardent person writes a diary, in which,
when the hours of prayer and penitence arrive, he inscribes his soul.
The pages thus written are, to him, burning and fragrant: he reads
them on his knees by midnight and by the morning star; he wets them
with his tears: they are sacred; too good for the world, and hardly
yet to be shown to the dearest friend.  This is the man-child that is
born to the soul, and her life still circulates in the babe.  The
umbilical cord has not yet been cut.  After some time has elapsed, he
begins to wish to admit his friend to this hallowed experience, and
with hesitation, yet with firmness, exposes the pages to his eye.
Will they not burn his eyes?  The friend coldly turns them over, and
passes from the writing to conversation, with easy transition, which
strikes the other party with astonishment and vexation.  He cannot
suspect the writing itself.  Days and nights of fervid life, of
communion with angels of darkness and of light, have engraved their
shadowy characters on that tear-stained book.  He suspects the
intelligence or the heart of his friend.  Is there then no friend?
He cannot yet credit that one may have impressive experience, and yet
may not know how to put his private fact into literature; and perhaps
the discovery that wisdom has other tongues and ministers than we,
that though we should hold our peace, the truth would not the less be
spoken, might check injuriously the flames of our zeal.  A man can
only speak, so long as he does not feel his speech to be partial and
inadequate.  It is partial, but he does not see it to be so, whilst
he utters it.  As soon as he is released from the instinctive and
particular, and sees its partiality, he shuts his mouth in disgust.
For, no man can write anything, who does not think that what he
writes is for the time the history of the world; or do anything well,
who does not esteem his work to be of importance.  My work may be of
none, but I must not think it of none, or I shall not do it with
impunity.

        In like manner, there is throughout nature something mocking,
something that leads us on and on, but arrives nowhere, keeps no
faith with us.  All promise outruns the performance.  We live in a
system of approximations.  Every end is prospective of some other
end, which is also temporary; a round and final success nowhere.  We
are encamped in nature, not domesticated.  Hunger and thirst lead us
on to eat and to drink; but bread and wine, mix and cook them how you
will, leave us hungry and thirsty, after the stomach is full.  It is
the same with all our arts and performances.  Our music, our poetry,
our language itself are not satisfactions, but suggestions.  The
hunger for wealth, which reduces the planet to a garden, fools the
eager pursuer.  What is the end sought?  Plainly to secure the ends
of good sense and beauty, from the intrusion of deformity or
vulgarity of any kind.  But what an operose method!  What a train of
means to secure a little conversation!  This palace of brick and
stone, these servants, this kitchen, these stables, horses and
equipage, this bank-stock, and file of mortgages; trade to all the
world, country-house and cottage by the waterside, all for a little
conversation, high, clear, and spiritual!  Could it not be had as
well by beggars on the highway?  No, all these things came from
successive efforts of these beggars to remove friction from the
wheels of life, and give opportunity.  Conversation, character, were
the avowed ends; wealth was good as it appeased the animal cravings,
cured the smoky chimney, silenced the creaking door, brought friends
together in a warm and quiet room, and kept the children and the
dinner-table in a different apartment.  Thought, virtue, beauty, were
the ends; but it was known that men of thought and virtue sometimes
had the headache, or wet feet, or could lose good time whilst the
room was getting warm in winter days.  Unluckily, in the exertions
necessary to remove these inconveniences, the main attention has been
diverted to this object; the old aims have been lost sight of, and to
remove friction has come to be the end.  That is the ridicule of rich
men, and Boston, London, Vienna, and now the governments generally of
the world, are cities and governments of the rich, and the masses are
not men, but _poor men_, that is, men who would be rich; this is the
ridicule of the class, that they arrive with pains and sweat and fury
nowhere; when all is done, it is for nothing.  They are like one who
has interrupted the conversation of a company to make his speech, and
now has forgotten what he went to say.  The appearance strikes the
eye everywhere of an aimless society, of aimless nations.  Were the
ends of nature so great and cogent, as to exact this immense
sacrifice of men?

        Quite analogous to the deceits in life, there is, as might be
expected, a similar effect on the eye from the face of external
nature.  There is in woods and waters a certain enticement and
flattery, together with a failure to yield a present satisfaction.
This disappointment is felt in every landscape.  I have seen the
softness and beauty of the summer-clouds floating feathery overhead,
enjoying, as it seemed, their height and privilege of motion, whilst
yet they appeared not so much the drapery of this place and hour, as
forelooking to some pavilions and gardens of festivity beyond.  It is
an odd jealousy: but the poet finds himself not near enough to his
object.  The pine-tree, the river, the bank of flowers before him,
does not seem to be nature.  Nature is still elsewhere.  This or this
is but outskirt and far-off reflection and echo of the triumph that
has passed by, and is now at its glancing splendor and heyday,
perchance in the neighboring fields, or, if you stand in the field,
then in the adjacent woods.  The present object shall give you this
sense of stillness that follows a pageant which has just gone by.
What splendid distance, what recesses of ineffable pomp and
loveliness in the sunset!  But who can go where they are, or lay his
hand or plant his foot thereon?  Off they fall from the round world
forever and ever.  It is the same among the men and women, as among
the silent trees; always a referred existence, an absence, never a
presence and satisfaction.  Is it, that beauty can never be grasped?
in persons and in landscape is equally inaccessible?  The accepted
and betrothed lover has lost the wildest charm of his maiden in her
acceptance of him.  She was heaven whilst he pursued her as a star:
she cannot be heaven, if she stoops to such a one as he.

        What shall we say of this omnipresent appearance of that first
projectile impulse, of this flattery and baulking of so many
well-meaning creatures?  Must we not suppose somewhere in the
universe a slight treachery and derision?  Are we not engaged to a
serious resentment of this use that is made of us?  Are we tickled
trout, and fools of nature?  One look at the face of heaven and earth
lays all petulance at rest, and soothes us to wiser convictions.  To
the intelligent, nature converts itself into a vast promise, and will
not be rashly explained.  Her secret is untold.  Many and many an
Oedipus arrives: he has the whole mystery teeming in his brain.
Alas! the same sorcery has spoiled his skill; no syllable can he
shape on his lips.  Her mighty orbit vaults like the fresh rainbow
into the deep, but no archangel's wing was yet strong enough to
follow it, and report of the return of the curve.  But it also
appears, that our actions are seconded and disposed to greater
conclusions than we designed.  We are escorted on every hand through
life by spiritual agents, and a beneficent purpose lies in wait for
us.  We cannot bandy words with nature, or deal with her as we deal
with persons.  If we measure our individual forces against hers, we
may easily feel as if we were the sport of an insuperable destiny.
But if, instead of identifying ourselves with the work, we feel that
the soul of the workman streams through us, we shall find the peace
of the morning dwelling first in our hearts, and the fathomless
powers of gravity and chemistry, and, over them, of life, preexisting
within us in their highest form.

        The uneasiness which the thought of our helplessness in the
chain of causes occasions us, results from looking too much at one
condition of nature, namely, Motion.  But the drag is never taken
from the wheel.  Wherever the impulse exceeds, the Rest or Identity
insinuates its compensation.  All over the wide fields of earth grows
the prunella or self-heal.  After every foolish day we sleep off the
fumes and furies of its hours; and though we are always engaged with
particulars, and often enslaved to them, we bring with us to every
experiment the innate universal laws.  These, while they exist in the
mind as ideas, stand around us in nature forever embodied, a present
sanity to expose and cure the insanity of men.  Our servitude to
particulars betrays into a hundred foolish expectations.  We
anticipate a new era from the invention of a locomotive, or a
balloon; the new engine brings with it the old checks.  They say that
by electro-magnetism, your sallad shall be grown from the seed,
whilst your fowl is roasting for dinner: it is a symbol of our modern
aims and endeavors,---of our condensation and acceleration of
objects: but nothing is gained: nature cannot be cheated: man's life
is but seventy sallads long, grow they swift or grow they slow.  In
these checks and impossibilities, however, we find our advantage, not
less than in the impulses.  Let the victory fall where it will, we
are on that side.  And the knowledge that we traverse the whole scale
of being, from the centre to the poles of nature, and have some stake
in every possibility, lends that sublime lustre to death, which
philosophy and religion have too outwardly and literally striven to
express in the popular doctrine of the immortality of the soul.  The
reality is more excellent than the report.  Here is no ruin, no
discontinuity, no spent ball.  The divine circulations never rest nor
linger.  Nature is the incarnation of a thought, and turns to a
thought again, as ice becomes water and gas.  The world is mind
precipitated, and the volatile essence is forever escaping again into
the state of free thought.  Hence the virtue and pungency of the
influence on the mind, of natural objects, whether inorganic or
organized.  Man imprisoned, man crystallized, man vegetative, speaks
to man impersonated.  That power which does not respect quantity,
which makes the whole and the particle its equal channel, delegates
its smile to the morning, and distils its essence into every drop of
rain.  Every moment instructs, and every object: for wisdom is
infused into every form.  It has been poured into us as blood; it
convulsed us as pain; it slid into us as pleasure; it enveloped us in
dull, melancholy days, or in days of cheerful labor; we did not guess
its essence, until after a long time.

 
 
        POLITICS
 
        Gold and iron are good
        To buy iron and gold;
        All earth's fleece and food
        For their like are sold.
        Boded Merlin wise,
        Proved Napoleon great, --
        Nor kind nor coinage buys
        Aught above its rate.
        Fear, Craft, and Avarice
        Cannot rear a State.
        Out of dust to build
        What is more than dust, --
        Walls Amphion piled
        Phoebus stablish must.
        When the Muses nine
        With the Virtues meet,
        Find to their design
        An Atlantic seat,
        By green orchard boughs
        Fended from the heat,
        Where the statesman ploughs
        Furrow for the wheat;
        When the Church is social worth,
        When the state-house is the hearth,
        Then the perfect State is come,
        The republican at home.
 
 
 
        ESSAY VII _Politics_

        In dealing with the State, we ought to remember that its
institution are not aboriginal, though they existed before we were
born: that they are not superior to the citizen: that every one of
them was once the act of a single man: every law and usage was a
man's expedient to meet a particular case: that they all are
imitable, all alterable; we may make as good; we may make better.
Society is an illusion to the young citizen.  It lies before him in
rigid repose, with certain names, men, and institutions, rooted like
oak-trees to the centre, round which all arrange themselves the best
they can.  But the old statesman knows that society is fluid; there
are no such roots and centres; but any particle may suddenly become
the centre of the movement, and compel the system to gyrate round it,
as every man of strong will, like Pisistratus, or Cromwell, does for
a time, and every man of truth, like Plato, or Paul, does forever.
But politics rest on necessary foundations, and cannot be treated
with levity.  Republics abound in young civilians, who believe that
the laws make the city, that grave modifications of the policy and
modes of living, and employments of the population, that commerce,
education, and religion, may be voted in or out; and that any
measure, though it were absurd, may be imposed on a people, if only
you can get sufficient voices to make it a law.  But the wise know
that foolish legislation is a rope of sand, which perishes in the
twisting; that the State must follow, and not lead the character and
progress of the citizen; the strongest usurper is quickly got rid of;
and they only who build on Ideas, build for eternity; and that the
form of government which prevails, is the expression of what
cultivation exists in the population which permits it.  The law is
only a memorandum.  We are superstitious, and esteem the statute
somewhat: so much life as it has in the character of living men, is
its force.  The statute stands there to say, yesterday we agreed so
and so, but how feel ye this article today?  Our statute is a
currency, which we stamp with our own portrait: it soon becomes
unrecognizable, and in process of time will return to the mint.
Nature is not democratic, nor limited-monarchical, but despotic, and
will not be fooled or abated of any jot of her authority, by the
pertest of her sons: and as fast as the public mind is opened to more
intelligence, the code is seen to be brute and stammering.  It speaks
not articulately, and must be made to.  Meantime the education of the
general mind never stops.  The reveries of the true and simple are
prophetic.  What the tender poetic youth dreams, and prays, and
paints today, but shuns the ridicule of saying aloud, shall presently
be the resolutions of public bodies, then shall be carried as
grievance and bill of rights through conflict and war, and then shall
be triumphant law and establishment for a hundred years, until it
gives place, in turn, to new prayers and pictures.  The history of
the State sketches in coarse outline the progress of thought, and
follows at a distance the delicacy of culture and of aspiration.

        The theory of politics, which has possessed the mind of men,
and which they have expressed the best they could in their laws and
in their revolutions, considers persons and property as the two
objects for whose protection government exists.  Of persons, all have
equal rights, in virtue of being identical in nature.  This interest,
of course, with its whole power demands a democracy.  Whilst the
rights of all as persons are equal, in virtue of their access to
reason, their rights in property are very unequal.  One man owns his
clothes, and another owns a county.  This accident, depending,
primarily, on the skill and virtue of the parties, of which there is
every degree, and, secondarily, on patrimony, falls unequally, and
its rights, of course, are unequal.  Personal rights, universally the
same, demand a government framed on the ratio of the census: property
demands a government framed on the ratio of owners and of owning.
Laban, who has flocks and herds, wishes them looked after by an
officer on the frontiers, lest the Midianites shall drive them off,
and pays a tax to that end.  Jacob has no flocks or herds, and no
fear of the Midianites, and pays no tax to the officer.  It seemed
fit that Laban and Jacob should have equal rights to elect the
officer, who is to defend their persons, but that Laban, and not
Jacob, should elect the officer who is to guard the sheep and cattle.
And, if question arise whether additional officers or watch-towers
should be provided, must not Laban and Isaac, and those who must sell
part of their herds to buy protection for the rest, judge better of
this, and with more right, than Jacob, who, because he is a youth and
a traveller, eats their bread and not his own.

        In the earliest society the proprietors made their own wealth,
and so long as it comes to the owners in the direct way, no other
opinion would arise in any equitable community, than that property
should make the law for property, and persons the law for persons.

        But property passes through donation or inheritance to those
who do not create it.  Gift, in one case, makes it as really the new
owner's, as labor made it the first owner's: in the other case, of
patrimony, the law makes an ownership, which will be valid in each
man's view according to the estimate which he sets on the public
tranquillity.

        It was not, however, found easy to embody the readily admitted
principle, that property should make law for property, and persons
for persons: since persons and property mixed themselves in every
transaction.  At last it seemed settled, that the rightful
distinction was, that the proprietors should have more elective
franchise than non-proprietors, on the Spartan principle of "calling
that which is just, equal; not that which is equal, just."

        That principle no longer looks so self-evident as it appeared
in former times, partly, because doubts have arisen whether too much
weight had not been allowed in the laws, to property, and such a
structure given to our usages, as allowed the rich to encroach on the
poor, and to keep them poor; but mainly, because there is an
instinctive sense, however obscure and yet inarticulate, that the
whole constitution of property, on its present tenures, is injurious,
and its influence on persons deteriorating and degrading; that truly,
the only interest for the consideration of the State, is persons:
that property will always follow persons; that the highest end of
government is the culture of men: and if men can be educated, the
institutions will share their improvement, and the moral sentiment
will write the law of the land.

        If it be not easy to settle the equity of this question, the
peril is less when we take note of our natural defences.  We are kept
by better guards than the vigilance of such magistrates as we
commonly elect.  Society always consists, in greatest part, of young
and foolish persons.  The old, who have seen through the hypocrisy of
courts and statesmen, die, and leave no wisdom to their sons.  They
believe their own newspaper, as their fathers did at their age.  With
such an ignorant and deceivable majority, States would soon run to
ruin, but that there are limitations, beyond which the folly and
ambition of governors cannot go.  Things have their laws, as well as
men; and things refuse to be trifled with.  Property will be
protected.  Corn will not grow, unless it is planted and manured; but
the farmer will not plant or hoe it, unless the chances are a hundred
to one, that he will cut and harvest it.  Under any forms, persons
and property must and will have their just sway.  They exert their
power, as steadily as matter its attraction.  Cover up a pound of
earth never so cunningly, divide and subdivide it; melt it to liquid,
convert it to gas; it will always weigh a pound: it will always
attract and resist other matter, by the full virtue of one pound
weight; -- and the attributes of a person, his wit and his moral
energy, will exercise, under any law or extinguishing tyranny, their
proper force, -- if not overtly, then covertly; if not for the law,
then against it; with right, or by might.

        The boundaries of personal influence it is impossible to fix,
as persons are organs of moral or supernatural force.  Under the
dominion of an idea, which possesses the minds of multitudes, as
civil freedom, or the religious sentiment, the powers of persons are
no longer subjects of calculation.  A nation of men unanimously bent
on freedom, or conquest, can easily confound the arithmetic of
statists, and achieve extravagant actions, out of all proportion to
their means; as, the Greeks, the Saracens, the Swiss, the Americans,
and the French have done.

        In like manner, to every particle of property belongs its own
attraction.  A cent is the representative of a certain quantity of
corn or other commodity.  Its value is in the necessities of the
animal man.  It is so much warmth, so much bread, so much water, so
much land.  The law may do what it will with the owner of property,
its just power will still attach to the cent.  The law may in a mad
freak say, that all shall have power except the owners of property:
they shall have no vote.  Nevertheless, by a higher law, the property
will, year after year, write every statute that respects property.
The non-proprietor will be the scribe of the proprietor.  What the
owners wish to do, the whole power of property will do, either
through the law, or else in defiance of it.  Of course, I speak of
all the property, not merely of the great estates.  When the rich are
outvoted, as frequently happens, it is the joint treasury of the poor
which exceeds their accumulations.  Every man owns something, if it
is only a cow, or a wheelbarrow, or his arms, and so has that
property to dispose of.

        The same necessity which secures the rights of person and
property against the malignity or folly of the magistrate, determines
the form and methods of governing, which are proper to each nation,
and to its habit of thought, and nowise transferable to other states
of society.  In this country, we are very vain of our political
institutions, which are singular in this, that they sprung, within
the memory of living men, from the character and condition of the
people, which they still express with sufficient fidelity, -- and we
ostentatiously prefer them to any other in history.  They are not
better, but only fitter for us.  We may be wise in asserting the
advantage in modern times of the democratic form, but to other states
of society, in which religion consecrated the monarchical, that and
not this was expedient.  Democracy is better for us, because the
religious sentiment of the present time accords better with it.  Born
democrats, we are nowise qualified to judge of monarchy, which, to
our fathers living in the monarchical idea, was also relatively
right.  But our institutions, though in coincidence with the spirit
of the age, have not any exemption from the practical defects which
have discredited other forms.  Every actual State is corrupt.  Good
men must not obey the laws too well.  What satire on government can
equal the severity of censure conveyed in the word _politic_, which
now for ages has signified _cunning_, intimating that the State is a
trick?

        The same benign necessity and the same practical abuse appear
in the parties into which each State divides itself, of opponents and
defenders of the administration of the government.  Parties are also
founded on instincts, and have better guides to their own humble aims
than the sagacity of their leaders.  They have nothing perverse in
their origin, but rudely mark some real and lasting relation.  We
might as wisely reprove the east wind, or the frost, as a political
party, whose members, for the most part, could give no account of
their position, but stand for the defence of those interests in which
they find themselves.  Our quarrel with them begins, when they quit
this deep natural ground at the bidding of some leader, and, obeying
personal considerations, throw themselves into the maintenance and
defence of points, nowise belonging to their system.  A party is
perpetually corrupted by personality.  Whilst we absolve the
association from dishonesty, we cannot extend the same charity to
their leaders.  They reap the rewards of the docility and zeal of the
masses which they direct.  Ordinarily, our parties are parties of
circumstance, and not of principle; as, the planting interest in
conflict with the commercial; the party of capitalists, and that of
operatives; parties which are identical in their moral character, and
which can easily change ground with each other, in the support of
many of their measures.  Parties of principle, as, religious sects,
or the party of free-trade, of universal suffrage, of abolition of
slavery, of abolition of capital punishment, degenerate into
personalities, or would inspire enthusiasm.  The vice of our leading
parties in this country (which may be cited as a fair specimen of
these societies of opinion) is, that they do not plant themselves on
the deep and necessary grounds to which they are respectively
entitled, but lash themselves to fury in the carrying of some local
and momentary measure, nowise useful to the commonwealth.  Of the two
great parties, which, at this hour, almost share the nation between
them, I should say, that, one has the best cause, and the other
contains the best men.  The philosopher, the poet, or the religious
man, will, of course, wish to cast his vote with the democrat, for
free-trade, for wide suffrage, for the abolition of legal cruelties
in the penal code, and for facilitating in every manner the access of
the young and the poor to the sources of wealth and power.  But he
can rarely accept the persons whom the so-called popular party
propose to him as representatives of these liberalities.  They have
not at heart the ends which give to the name of democracy what hope
and virtue are in it.  The spirit of our American radicalism is
destructive and aimless: it is not loving; it has no ulterior and
divine ends; but is destructive only out of hatred and selfishness.
On the other side, the conservative party, composed of the most
moderate, able, and cultivated part of the population, is timid, and
merely defensive of property.  It vindicates no right, it aspires to
no real good, it brands no crime, it proposes no generous policy, it
does not build, nor write, nor cherish the arts, nor foster religion,
nor establish schools, nor encourage science, nor emancipate the
slave, nor befriend the poor, or the Indian, or the immigrant.  From
neither party, when in power, has the world any benefit to expect in
science, art, or humanity, at all commensurate with the resources of
the nation.

        I do not for these defects despair of our republic.  We are not
at the mercy of any waves of chance.  In the strife of ferocious
parties, human nature always finds itself cherished, as the children
of the convicts at Botany Bay are found to have as healthy a moral
sentiment as other children.  Citizens of feudal states are alarmed
at our democratic institutions lapsing into anarchy; and the older
and more cautious among ourselves are learning from Europeans to look
with some terror at our turbulent freedom.  It is said that in our
license of construing the Constitution, and in the despotism of
public opinion, we have no anchor; and one foreign observer thinks he
has found the safeguard in the sanctity of Marriage among us; and
another thinks he has found it in our Calvinism.  Fisher Ames
expressed the popular security more wisely, when he compared a
monarchy and a republic, saying, "that a monarchy is a merchantman,
which sails well, but will sometimes strike on a rock, and go to the
bottom; whilst a republic is a raft, which would never sink, but then
your feet are always in water." No forms can have any dangerous
importance, whilst we are befriended by the laws of things.  It makes
no difference how many tons weight of atmosphere presses on our
heads, so long as the same pressure resists it within the lungs.
Augment the mass a thousand fold, it cannot begin to crush us, as
long as reaction is equal to action.  The fact of two poles, of two
forces, centripetal and centrifugal, is universal, and each force by
its own activity develops the other.  Wild liberty develops iron
conscience.  Want of liberty, by strengthening law and decorum,
stupefies conscience.  `Lynch-law' prevails only where there is
greater hardihood and self-subsistency in the leaders.  A mob cannot
be a permanency: everybody's interest requires that it should not
exist, and only justice satisfies all.

        We must trust infinitely to the beneficent necessity which
shines through all laws.  Human nature expresses itself in them as
characteristically as in statues, or songs, or railroads, and an
abstract of the codes of nations would be a transcript of the common
conscience.  Governments have their origin in the moral identity of
men.  Reason for one is seen to be reason for another, and for every
other.  There is a middle measure which satisfies all parties, be
they never so many, or so resolute for their own.  Every man finds a
sanction for his simplest claims and deeds in decisions of his own
mind, which he calls Truth and Holiness.  In these decisions all the
citizens find a perfect agreement, and only in these; not in what is
good to eat, good to wear, good use of time, or what amount of land,
or of public aid, each is entitled to claim.  This truth and justice
men presently endeavor to make application of, to the measuring of
land, the apportionment of service, the protection of life and
property.  Their first endeavors, no doubt, are very awkward.  Yet
absolute right is the first governor; or, every government is an
impure theocracy.  The idea, after which each community is aiming to
make and mend its law, is, the will of the wise man.  The wise man,
it cannot find in nature, and it makes awkward but earnest efforts to
secure his government by contrivance; as, by causing the entire
people to give their voices on every measure; or, by a double choice
to get the representation of the whole; or, by a selection of the
best citizens; or, to secure the advantages of efficiency and
internal peace, by confiding the government to one, who may himself
select his agents.  All forms of government symbolize an immortal
government, common to all dynasties and independent of numbers,
perfect where two men exist, perfect where there is only one man.

        Every man's nature is a sufficient advertisement to him of the
character of his fellows.  My right and my wrong, is their right and
their wrong.  Whilst I do what is fit for me, and abstain from what
is unfit, my neighbor and I shall often agree in our means, and work
together for a time to one end.  But whenever I find my dominion over
myself not sufficient for me, and undertake the direction of him
also, I overstep the truth, and come into false relations to him.  I
may have so much more skill or strength than he, that he cannot
express adequately his sense of wrong, but it is a lie, and hurts
like a lie both him and me.  Love and nature cannot maintain the
assumption: it must be executed by a practical lie, namely, by force.
This undertaking for another, is the blunder which stands in colossal
ugliness in the governments of the world.  It is the same thing in
numbers, as in a pair, only not quite so intelligible.  I can see
well enough a great difference between my setting myself down to a
self-control, and my going to make somebody else act after my views:
but when a quarter of the human race assume to tell me what I must
do, I may be too much disturbed by the circumstances to see so
clearly the absurdity of their command.  Therefore, all public ends
look vague and quixotic beside private ones.  For, any laws but those
which men make for themselves, are laughable.  If I put myself in the
place of my child, and we stand in one thought, and see that things
are thus or thus, that perception is law for him and me.  We are both
there, both act.  But if, without carrying him into the thought, I
look over into his plot, and, guessing how it is with him, ordain
this or that, he will never obey me.  This is the history of
governments, -- one man does something which is to bind another.  A
man who cannot be acquainted with me, taxes me; looking from afar at
me, ordains that a part of my labor shall go to this or that
whimsical end, not as I, but as he happens to fancy.  Behold the
consequence.  Of all debts, men are least willing to pay the taxes.
What a satire is this on government!  Everywhere they think they get
their money's worth, except for these.

        Hence, the less government we have, the better, -- the fewer
laws, and the less confided power.  The antidote to this abuse of
formal Government, is, the influence of private character, the growth
of the Individual; the appearance of the principal to supersede the
proxy; the appearance of the wise man, of whom the existing
government, is, it must be owned, but a shabby imitation.  That which
all things tend to educe, which freedom, cultivation, intercourse,
revolutions, go to form and deliver, is character; that is the end of
nature, to reach unto this coronation of her king.  To educate the
wise man, the State exists; and with the appearance of the wise man,
the State expires.  The appearance of character makes the State
unnecessary.  The wise man is the State.  He needs no army, fort, or
navy, -- he loves men too well; no bribe, or feast, or palace, to
draw friends to him; no vantage ground, no favorable circumstance.
He needs no library, for he has not done thinking; no church, for he
is a prophet; no statute book, for he has the lawgiver; no money, for
he is value; no road, for he is at home where he is; no experience,
for the life of the creator shoots through him, and looks from his
eyes.  He has no personal friends, for he who has the spell to draw
the prayer and piety of all men unto him, needs not husband and
educate a few, to share with him a select and poetic life.  His
relation to men is angelic; his memory is myrrh to them; his
presence, frankincense and flowers.

        We think our civilization near its meridian, but we are yet
only at the cock-crowing and the morning star.  In our barbarous
society the influence of character is in its infancy.  As a political
power, as the rightful lord who is to tumble all rulers from their
chairs, its presence is hardly yet suspected.  Malthus and Ricardo
quite omit it; the Annual Register is silent; in the Conversations'
Lexicon, it is not set down; the President's Message, the Queen's
Speech, have not mentioned it; and yet it is never nothing.  Every
thought which genius and piety throw into the world, alters the
world.  The gladiators in the lists of power feel, through all their
frocks of force and simulation, the presence of worth.  I think the
very strife of trade and ambition are confession of this divinity;
and successes in those fields are the poor amends, the fig-leaf with
which the shamed soul attempts to hide its nakedness.  I find the
like unwilling homage in all quarters.  It is because we know how
much is due from us, that we are impatient to show some petty talent
as a substitute for worth.  We are haunted by a conscience of this
right to grandeur of character, and are false to it.  But each of us
has some talent, can do somewhat useful, or graceful, or formidable,
or amusing, or lucrative.  That we do, as an apology to others and to
ourselves, for not reaching the mark of a good and equal life.  But
it does not satisfy _us_, whilst we thrust it on the notice of our
companions.  It may throw dust in their eyes, but does not smooth our
own brow, or give us the tranquillity of the strong when we walk
abroad.  We do penance as we go.  Our talent is a sort of expiation,
and we are constrained to reflect on our splendid moment, with a
certain humiliation, as somewhat too fine, and not as one act of many
acts, a fair expression of our permanent energy.  Most persons of
ability meet in society with a kind of tacit appeal.  Each seems to
say, `I am not all here.' Senators and presidents have climbed so
high with pain enough, not because they think the place specially
agreeable, but as an apology for real worth, and to vindicate their
manhood in our eyes.  This conspicuous chair is their compensation to
themselves for being of a poor, cold, hard nature.  They must do what
they can.  Like one class of forest animals, they have nothing but a
prehensile tail: climb they must, or crawl.  If a man found himself
so rich-natured that he could enter into strict relations with the
best persons, and make life serene around him by the dignity and
sweetness of his behavior, could he afford to circumvent the favor of
the caucus and the press, and covet relations so hollow and pompous,
as those of a politician?  Surely nobody would be a charlatan, who
could afford to be sincere.

        The tendencies of the times favor the idea of self-government,
and leave the individual, for all code, to the rewards and penalties
of his own constitution, which work with more energy than we believe,
whilst we depend on artificial restraints.  The movement in this
direction has been very marked in modern history.  Much has been
blind and discreditable, but the nature of the revolution is not
affected by the vices of the revolters; for this is a purely moral
force.  It was never adopted by any party in history, neither can be.
It separates the individual from all party, and unites him, at the
same time, to the race.  It promises a recognition of higher rights
than those of personal freedom, or the security of property.  A man
has a right to be employed, to be trusted, to be loved, to be
revered.  The power of love, as the basis of a State, has never been
tried.  We must not imagine that all things are lapsing into
confusion, if every tender protestant be not compelled to bear his
part in certain social conventions: nor doubt that roads can be
built, letters carried, and the fruit of labor secured, when the
government of force is at an end.  Are our methods now so excellent
that all competition is hopeless?  Could not a nation of friends even
devise better ways?  On the other hand, let not the most conservative
and timid fear anything from a premature surrender of the bayonet,
and the system of force.  For, according to the order of nature,
which is quite superior to our will, it stands thus; there will
always be a government of force, where men are selfish; and when they
are pure enough to abjure the code of force, they will be wise enough
to see how these public ends of the post-office, of the highway, of
commerce, and the exchange of property, of museums and libraries, of
institutions of art and science, can be answered.

        We live in a very low state of the world, and pay unwilling
tribute to governments founded on force.  There is not, among the
most religious and instructed men of the most religious and civil
nations, a reliance on the moral sentiment, and a sufficient belief
in the unity of things to persuade them that society can be
maintained without artificial restraints, as well as the solar
system; or that the private citizen might be reasonable, and a good
neighbor, without the hint of a jail or a confiscation.  What is
strange too, there never was in any man sufficient faith in the power
of rectitude, to inspire him with the broad design of renovating the
State on the principle of right and love.  All those who have
pretended this design, have been partial reformers, and have admitted
in some manner the supremacy of the bad State.  I do not call to mind
a single human being who has steadily denied the authority of the
laws, on the simple ground of his own moral nature.  Such designs,
full of genius and full of fate as they are, are not entertained
except avowedly as air-pictures.  If the individual who exhibits
them, dare to think them practicable, he disgusts scholars and
churchmen; and men of talent, and women of superior sentiments,
cannot hide their contempt.  Not the less does nature continue to
fill the heart of youth with suggestions of this enthusiasm, and
there are now men, -- if indeed I can speak in the plural number, --
more exactly, I will say, I have just been conversing with one man,
to whom no weight of adverse experience will make it for a moment
appear impossible, impossible, that thousands of human beings might
exercise towards each other the grandest and simplest sentiments, as
well as a knot of friends, or a pair of lovers.

 
 
        NOMINALIST AND REALIST
 
 
        In countless upward-striving waves
        The moon-drawn tide-wave strives;
        In thousand far-transplanted grafts
        The parent fruit survives;
        So, in the new-born millions,
        The perfect Adam lives.
        Not less are summer-mornings dear
        To every child they wake,
        And each with novel life his sphere
        Fills for his proper sake.

 
 
        ESSAY VIII _Nominalist and Realist_

        I cannot often enough say, that a man is only a relative and
representative nature.  Each is a hint of the truth, but far enough
from being that truth, which yet he quite newly and inevitably
suggests to us.  If I seek it in him, I shall not find it.  Could any
man conduct into me the pure stream of that which he pretends to be!
Long afterwards, I find that quality elsewhere which he promised me.
The genius of the Platonists, is intoxicating to the student, yet how
few particulars of it can I detach from all their books.  The man
momentarily stands for the thought, but will not bear examination;
and a society of men will cursorily represent well enough a certain
quality and culture, for example, chivalry or beauty of manners, but
separate them, and there is no gentleman and no lady in the group.
The least hint sets us on the pursuit of a character, which no man
realizes.  We have such exorbitant eyes, that on seeing the smallest
arc, we complete the curve, and when the curtain is lifted from the
diagram which it seemed to veil, we are vexed to find that no more
was drawn, than just that fragment of an arc which we first beheld.
We are greatly too liberal in our construction of each other's
faculty and promise.  Exactly what the parties have already done,
they shall do again; but that which we inferred from their nature and
inception, they will not do.  That is in nature, but not in them.
That happens in the world, which we often witness in a public debate.
Each of the speakers eonsmustfurnishxpresses himself imperfectly: no
one of them hears much that another says, such is the preoccupation
of mind of each; and the audience, who have only to hear and not to
speak, judge very wisely and superiorly how wrongheaded and unskilful
is each of the debaters to his own affair.  Great men or men of great
gifts you shall easily find, but symmetrical men never.  When I meet
a pure intellectual force, or a generosity of affection, I believe,
here then is man; and am presently mortified by the discovery, that
this individual is no more available to his own or to the general
ends, than his companions; because the power which drew my respect,
is not supported by the total symphony of his talents.  All persons
exist to society by some shining trait of beauty or utility, which
they have.  We borrow the proportions of the man from that one fine
feature, and finish the portrait symmetrically; which is false; for
the rest of his body is small or deformed.  I observe a person who
makes a good public appearance, and conclude thence the perfection of
his private character, on which this is based; but he has no private
character.  He is a graceful cloak or lay-figure for holidays.  All
our poets, heroes, and saints, fail utterly in some one or in many
parts to satisfy our idea, fail to draw our spontaneous interest, and
so leave us without any hope of realization but in our own future.
Our exaggeration of all fine characters arises from the fact, that we
identify each in turn with the soul.  But there are no such men as we
fable; no Jesus, nor Pericles, nor Caesar, nor Angelo, nor
Washington, such as we have made.  We consecrate a great deal of
nonsense, because it was allowed by great men.  There is none without
his foible.  I verily believe if an angel should come to chaunt the
chorus of the moral law, he would eat too much gingerbread, or take
liberties with private letters, or do some precious atrocity.  It is
bad enough, that our geniuses cannot do anything
usefulonsmustfurnish, but it is worse that no man is fit for society,
who has fine traits.  He is admired at a distance, but he cannot come
near without appearing a cripple.  The men of fine parts protect
themselves by solitude, or by courtesy, or by satire, or by an acid
worldly manner, each concealing, as he best can, his incapacity for
useful association, but they want either love or self-reliance.

        Our native love of reality joins with this experience to teach
us a little reserve, and to dissuade a too sudden surrender to the
brilliant qualities of persons.  Young people admire talents or
particular excellences; as we grow older, we value total powers and
effects, as, the impression, the quality, the spirit of men and
things.  The genius is all.  The man, -- it is his system: we do not
try a solitary word or act, but his habit.  The acts which you
praise, I praise not, since they are departures from his faith, and
are mere compliances.  The magnetism which arranges tribes and races
in one polarity, is alone to be respected; the men are steel-filings.
Yet we unjustly select a particle, and say, `O steel-filing number
one! what heart-drawings I feel to thee! what prodigious virtues are
these of thine! how constitutional to thee, and incommunicable.'
Whilst we speak, the loadstone is withdrawn; down falls our filing in
a heap with the rest, and we continue our mummery to the wretched
shaving.  Let us go for universals; for the magnetism, not for the
needles.  Human life and its persons are poor empirical pretensions.
A personal influence is an _ignis fatuus_.  If they say, it is great,
it is great; if they say, it is small, it is small; you see it, and
you see it not, by turns; it borrows all its size from the momentary
estimation of the speakers: the Will-of-the-wisp vanishes, if you go
too near, vanishes if you go too far, and only blazes at one angle.
Who can tell if Washington be a great man, or no?  Who can tell if
Franklin be?  Yes, or any but the twelve, or six, or
thonsmustfurnishree great gods of fame?  And they, too, loom and fade
before the eternal.

        We are amphibious creatures, weaponed for two elements, having
two sets of faculties, the particular and the catholic.  We adjust
our instrument for general observation, and sweep the heavens as
easily as we pick out a single figure in the terrestrial landscape.
We are practically skilful in detecting elements, for which we have
no place in our theory, and no name.  Thus we are very sensible of an
atmospheric influence in men and in bodies of men, not accounted for
in an arithmetical addition of all their measurable properties.
There is a genius of a nation, which is not to be found in the
numerical citizens, but which characterizes the society.  England,
strong, punctual, practical, well-spoken England, I should not find,
if I should go to the island to seek it.  In the parliament, in the
playhouse, at dinner-tables, I might see a great number of rich,
ignorant, book-read, conventional, proud men, -- many old women, --
and not anywhere the Englishman who made the good speeches, combined
the accurate engines, and did the bold and nervous deeds.  It is even
worse in America, where, from the intellectual quickness of the race,
the genius of the country is more splendid in its promise, and more
slight in its performance.  Webster cannot do the work of Webster.
We conceive distinctly enough the French, the Spanish, the German
genius, and it is not the less real, that perhaps we should not meet
in either of those nations, a single individual who corresponded with
the type.  We infer the spirit of the nation in great measure from
the language, which is a sort of monument, to which each forcible
individual in a course of many hundred years has contributed a stone.
And, universally, a good example of this social force, is the
veracity of language, which cannot be debauched.  In any controversy
concerning morals, an appeal may be made with safety to the
sentiments, which the language of thonsmustfurnishe people expresses.
Proverbs, words, and grammar inflections convey the public sense with
more purity and precision, than the wisest individual.

        In the famous dispute with the Nominalists, the Realists had a
good deal of reason.  General ideas are essences.  They are our gods:
they round and ennoble the most partial and sordid way of living.
Our proclivity to details cannot quite degrade our life, and divest
it of poetry.  The day-laborer is reckoned as standing at the foot of
the social scale, yet he is saturated with the laws of the world.
His measures are the hours; morning and night, solstice and equinox,
geometry, astronomy, and all the lovely accidents of nature play
through his mind.  Money, which represents the prose of life, and
which is hardly spoken of in parlors without an apology, is, in its
effects and laws, as beautiful as roses.  Property keeps the accounts
of the world, and is always moral.  The property will be found where
the labor, the wisdom, and the virtue have been in nations, in
classes, and (the whole life-time considered, with the compensations)
in the individual also.  How wise the world appears, when the laws
and usages of nations are largely detailed, and the completeness of
the municipal system is considered!  Nothing is left out.  If you go
into the markets, and the custom-houses, the insurers' and notaries'
offices, the offices of sealers of weights and measures, of
inspection of provisions, -- it will appear as if one man had made it
all.  Wherever you go, a wit like your own has been before you, and
has realized its thought.  The Eleusinian mysteries, the Egyptian
architecture, the Indian astronomy, the Greek sculpture, show that
there always were seeing and knowing men in the planet.  The world is
full of masonic ties, of guilds, of secret and public legions of
honor; that of scholars, for example; and that of gentlemen
fraternizing with the upper class of every country and every culture.

        I am very much struck in literature bonsmustfurnishy the
appearance, that one person wrote all the books; as if the editor of
a journal planted his body of reporters in different parts of the
field of action, and relieved some by others from time to time; but
there is such equality and identity both of judgment and point of
view in the narrative, that it is plainly the work of one all-seeing,
all-hearing gentleman.  I looked into Pope's Odyssey yesterday: it is
as correct and elegant after our canon of today, as if it were newly
written.  The modernness of all good books seems to give me an
existence as wide as man.  What is well done, I feel as if I did;
what is ill-done, I reck not of.  Shakspeare's passages of passion
(for example, in Lear and Hamlet) are in the very dialect of the
present year.  I am faithful again to the whole over the members in
my use of books.  I find the most pleasure in reading a book in a
manner least flattering to the author.  I read Proclus, and sometimes
Plato, as I might read a dictionary, for a mechanical help to the
fancy and the imagination.  I read for the lustres, as if one should
use a fine picture in a chromatic experiment, for its rich colors.
'Tis not Proclus, but a piece of nature and fate that I explore.  It
is a greater joy to see the author's author, than himself.  A higher
pleasure of the same kind I found lately at a concert, where I went
to hear Handel's Messiah.  As the master overpowered the littleness
and incapableness of the performers, and made them conductors of his
electricity, so it was easy to observe what efforts nature was making
through so many hoarse, wooden, and imperfect persons, to produce
beautiful voices, fluid and soul-guided men and women.  The genius of
nature was paramount at the oratorio.

        This preference of the genius to the parts is the secret of
that deification of art, which is found in all superior minds.  Art,
in the artist, is proportion, or, a habitual respect to the whole by
an eye loving beauty in details.  And the wonder and charm of it is
the sanity in insanonsmustfurnishity which it denotes.  Proportion is
almost impossible to human beings.  There is no one who does not
exaggerate.  In conversation, men are encumbered with personality,
and talk too much.  In modern sculpture, picture, and poetry, the
beauty is miscellaneous; the artist works here and there, and at all
points, adding and adding, instead of unfolding the unit of his
thought.  Beautiful details we must have, or no artist: but they must
be means and never other.  The eye must not lose sight for a moment
of the purpose.  Lively boys write to their ear and eye, and the cool
reader finds nothing but sweet jingles in it.  When they grow older,
they respect the argument.

        We obey the same intellectual integrity, when we study in
exceptions the law of the world.  Anomalous facts, as the never quite
obsolete rumors of magic and demonology, and the new allegations of
phrenologists and neurologists, are of ideal use.  They are good
indications.  Homoeopathy is insignificant as an art of healing, but
of great value as criticism on the hygeia or medical practice of the
time.  So with Mesmerism, Swedenborgism, Fourierism, and the
Millennial Church; they are poor pretensions enough, but good
criticism on the science, philosophy, and preaching of the day.  For
these abnormal insights of the adepts, ought to be normal, and things
of course.

        All things show us, that on every side we are very near to the
best.  It seems not worth while to execute with too much pains some
one intellectual, or aesthetical, or civil feat, when presently the
dream will scatter, and we shall burst into universal power.  The
reason of idleness and of crime is the deferring of our hopes.
Whilst we are waiting, we beguile the time with jokes, with sleep,
with eating, and with crimes.

        Thus we settle it in our cool libraries, that all the agents
with which we deal are subalterns, which we can well afford to let
pass, and life will be simpler when we live at the centre, and flout
the surfaces.  I wish onsmustfurnishto speak with all respect of
persons, but sometimes I must pinch myself to keep awake, and
preserve the due decorum.  They melt so fast into each other, that
they are like grass and trees, and it needs an effort to treat them
as individuals.  Though the uninspired man certainly finds persons a
conveniency in household matters, the divine man does not respect
them: he sees them as a rack of clouds, or a fleet of ripples which
the wind drives over the surface of the water.  But this is flat
rebellion.  Nature will not be Buddhist: she resents generalizing,
and insults the philosopher in every moment with a million of fresh
particulars.  It is all idle talking: as much as a man is a whole, so
is he also a part; and it were partial not to see it.  What you say
in your pompous distribution only distributes you into your class and
section.  You have not got rid of parts by denying them, but are the
more partial.  You are one thing, but nature is _one thing and the
other thing_, in the same moment.  She will not remain orbed in a
thought, but rushes into persons; and when each person, inflamed to a
fury of personality, would conquer all things to his poor crotchet,
she raises up against him another person, and by many persons
incarnates again a sort of whole.  She will have all.  Nick Bottom
cannot play all the parts, work it how he may: there will be somebody
else, and the world will be round.  Everything must have its flower
or effort at the beautiful, coarser or finer according to its stuff.
They relieve and recommend each other, and the sanity of society is a
balance of a thousand insanities.  She punishes abstractionists, and
will only forgive an induction which is rare and casual.  We like to
come to a height of land and see the landscape, just as we value a
general remark in conversation.  But it is not the intention of
nature that we should live by general views.  We fetch fire and
water, run about all day among the shops and markets, and get our
clothes and shoes monsmustfurnishade and mended, and are the victims
of these details, and once in a fortnight we arrive perhaps at a
rational moment.  If we were not thus infatuated, if we saw the real
from hour to hour, we should not be here to write and to read, but
should have been burned or frozen long ago.  She would never get
anything done, if she suffered admirable Crichtons, and universal
geniuses.  She loves better a wheelwright who dreams all night of
wheels, and a groom who is part of his horse: for she is full of
work, and these are her hands.  As the frugal farmer takes care that
his cattle shall eat down the rowan, and swine shall eat the waste of
his house, and poultry shall pick the crumbs, so our economical
mother despatches a new genius and habit of mind into every district
and condition of existence, plants an eye wherever a new ray of light
can fall, and gathering up into some man every property in the
universe, establishes thousandfold occult mutual attractions among
her offspring, that all this wash and waste of power may be imparted
and exchanged.

        Great dangers undoubtedly accrue from this incarnation and
distribution of the godhead, and hence nature has her maligners, as
if she were Circe; and Alphonso of Castille fancied he could have
given useful advice.  But she does not go unprovided; she has
hellebore at the bottom of the cup.  Solitude would ripen a plentiful
crop of despots.  The recluse thinks of men as having his manner, or
as not having his manner; and as having degrees of it, more and less.
But when he comes into a public assembly, he sees that men have very
different manners from his own, and in their way admirable.  In his
childhood and youth, he has had many checks and censures, and thinks
modestly enough of his own endowment.  When afterwards he comes to
unfold it in propitious circumstance, it seems the only talent: he is
delighted with his success, and accounts himself already the fellow
of the great.  But he goes into a mob, into a banking-house, into a
monsmustfurnishechanic's shop, into a mill, into a laboratory, into a
ship, into a camp, and in each new place he is no better than an
idiot: other talents take place, and rule the hour.  The rotation
which whirls every leaf and pebble to the meridian, reaches to every
gift of man, and we all take turns at the top.

        For nature, who abhors mannerism, has set her heart on breaking
up all styles and tricks, and it is so much easier to do what one has
done before, than to do a new thing, that there is a perpetual
tendency to a set mode.  In every conversation, even the highest,
there is a certain trick, which may be soon learned by an acute
person, and then that particular style continued indefinitely.  Each
man, too, is a tyrant in tendency, because he would impose his idea
on others; and their trick is their natural defence.  Jesus would
absorb the race; but Tom Paine or the coarsest blasphemer helps
humanity by resisting this exuberance of power.  Hence the immense
benefit of party in politics, as it reveals faults of character in a
chief, which the intellectual force of the persons, with ordinary
opportunity, and not hurled into aphelion by hatred, could not have
seen.  Since we are all so stupid, what benefit that there should be
two stupidities!  It is like that brute advantage so essential to
astronomy, of having the diameter of the earth's orbit for a base of
its triangles.  Democracy is morose, and runs to anarchy, but in the
state, and in the schools, it is indispensable to resist the
consolidation of all men into a few men.  If John was perfect, why
are you and I alive?  As long as any man exists, there is some need
of him; let him fight for his own.  A new poet has appeared; a new
character approached us; why should we refuse to eat bread, until we
have found his regiment and section in our old army-files?  Why not a
new man?  Here is a new enterprise of Brook Farm, of Skeneateles, of
Northampton: why so impatient to baptise them Essenes, or
Port-Royalists, or Shakers, or by any knoonsmustfurnishwn and effete
name?  Let it be a new way of living.  Why have only two or three
ways of life, and not thousands?  Every man is wanted, and no man is
wanted much.  We came this time for condiments, not for corn.  We
want the great genius only for joy; for one star more in our
constellation, for one tree more in our grove.  But he thinks we wish
to belong to him, as he wishes to occupy us.  He greatly mistakes us.
I think I have done well, if I have acquired a new word from a good
author; and my business with him is to find my own, though it were
only to melt him down into an epithet or an image for daily use.

        "Into paint will I grind thee, my bride!"

        To embroil the confusion, and make it impossible to arrive at
any general statement, when we have insisted on the imperfection of
individuals, our affections and our experience urge that every
individual is entitled to honor, and a very generous treatment is
sure to be repaid.  A recluse sees only two or three persons, and
allows them all their room; they spread themselves at large.  The man
of state looks at many, and compares the few habitually with others,
and these look less.  Yet are they not entitled to this generosity of
reception? and is not munificence the means of insight?  For though
gamesters say, that the cards beat all the players, though they were
never so skilful, yet in the contest we are now considering, the
players are also the game, and share the power of the cards.  If you
criticise a fine genius, the odds are that you are out of your
reckoning, and, instead of the poet, are censuring your own
caricature of him.  For there is somewhat spheral and infinite in
every man, especially in every genius, which, if you can come very
near him, sports with all your limitations.  For, rightly, every man
is a channel through which heaven floweth, and, whilst I fancied I
was criticising him, I was censuring or rather terminating my own
soul.  After taxing Goethe as a courtier, artificial,
unbelieonsmustfurnishving, worldly, -- I took up this book of Helena,
and found him an Indian of the wilderness, a piece of pure nature
like an apple or an oak, large as morning or night, and virtuous as a
briar-rose.

        But care is taken that the whole tune shall be played.  If we
were not kept among surfaces, every thing would be large and
universal: now the excluded attributes burst in on us with the more
brightness, that they have been excluded.  "Your turn now, my turn
next," is the rule of the game.  The universality being hindered in
its primary form, comes in the secondary form of _all sides_: the
points come in succession to the meridian, and by the speed of
rotation, a new whole is formed.  Nature keeps herself whole, and her
representation complete in the experience of each mind.  She suffers
no seat to be vacant in her college.  It is the secret of the world
that all things subsist, and do not die, but only retire a little
from sight, and afterwards return again.  Whatever does not concern
us, is concealed from us.  As soon as a person is no longer related
to our present well-being, he is concealed, or _dies_, as we say.
Really, all things and persons are related to us, but according to
our nature, they act on us not at once, but in succession, and we are
made aware of their presence one at a time.  All persons, all things
which we have known, are here present, and many more than we see; the
world is full.  As the ancient said, the world is a _plenum_ or
solid; and if we saw all things that really surround us, we should be
imprisoned and unable to move.  For, though nothing is impassable to
the soul, but all things are pervious to it, and like highways, yet
this is only whilst the soul does not see them.  As soon as the soul
sees any object, it stops before that object.  Therefore, the divine
Providence, which keeps the universe open in every direction to the
soul, conceals all the furniture and all the persons that do not
concern a particular soul, from theonsmustfurnish senses of that
individual.  Through solidest eternal things, the man finds his road,
as if they did not subsist, and does not once suspect their being.
As soon as he needs a new object, suddenly he beholds it, and no
longer attempts to pass through it, but takes another way.  When he
has exhausted for the time the nourishment to be drawn from any one
person or thing, that object is withdrawn from his observation, and
though still in his immediate neighborhood, he does not suspect its
presence.

        Nothing is dead: men feign themselves dead, and endure mock
funerals and mournful obituaries, and there they stand looking out of
the window, sound and well, in some new and strange disguise.  Jesus
is not dead: he is very well alive: nor John, nor Paul, nor Mahomet,
nor Aristotle; at times we believe we have seen them all, and could
easily tell the names under which they go.

        If we cannot make voluntary and conscious steps in the
admirable science of universals, let us see the parts wisely, and
infer the genius of nature from the best particulars with a becoming
charity.  What is best in each kind is an index of what should be the
average of that thing.  Love shows me the opulence of nature, by
disclosing to me in my friend a hidden wealth, and I infer an equal
depth of good in every other direction.  It is commonly said by
farmers, that a good pear or apple costs no more time or pains to
rear, than a poor one; so I would have no work of art, no speech, or
action, or thought, or friend, but the best.

        The end and the means, the gamester and the game, -- life is
made up of the intermixture and reaction of these two amicable
powers, whose marriage appears beforehand monstrous, as each denies
and tends to abolish the other.  We must reconcile the contradictions
as we can, but their discord and their concord introduce wild
absurdities into our thinking and speech.  No sentence will hold the
whole truth, and the only way in which we can be just, is by giving
ourseonsmustfurnishlves the lie; Speech is better than silence;
silence is better than speech; -- All things are in contact; every
atom has a sphere of repulsion; -- Things are, and are not, at the
same time; -- and the like.  All the universe over, there is but one
thing, this old Two-Face, creator-creature, mind-matter, right-wrong,
of which any proposition may be affirmed or denied.  Very fitly,
therefore, I assert, that every man is a partialist, that nature
secures him as an instrument by self-conceit, preventing the
tendencies to religion and science; and now further assert, that,
each man's genius being nearly and affectionately explored, he is
justified in his individuality, as his nature is found to be immense;
and now I add, that every man is a universalist also, and, as our
earth, whilst it spins on its own axis, spins all the time around the
sun through the celestial spaces, so the least of its rational
children, the most dedicated to his private affair, works out, though
as it were under a disguise, the universal problem.  We fancy men are
individuals; so are pumpkins; but every pumpkin in the field, goes
through every point of pumpkin history.  The rabid democrat, as soon
as he is senator and rich man, has ripened beyond possibility of
sincere radicalism, and unless he can resist the sun, he must be
conservative the remainder of his days.  Lord Eldon said in his old
age, "that, if he were to begin life again, he would be damned but he
would begin as agitator."

        We hide this universality, if we can, but it appears at all
points.  We are as ungrateful as children.  There is nothing we
cherish and strive to draw to us, but in some hour we turn and rend
it.  We keep a running fire of sarcasm at ignorance and the life of
the senses; then goes by, perchance, a fair girl, a piece of life,
gay and happy, and making the commonest offices beautiful, by the
energy and heart with which she does them, and seeing this, we admire
and love her and them, and say, "Lo! a geonsmustfurnishnuine creature
of the fair earth, not dissipated, or too early ripened by books,
philosophy, religion, society, or care!" insinuating a treachery and
contempt for all we had so long loved and wrought in ourselves and
others.

        If we could have any security against moods!  If the
profoundest prophet could be holden to his words, and the hearer who
is ready to sell all and join the crusade, could have any certificate
that tomorrow his prophet shall not unsay his testimony!  But the
Truth sits veiled there on the Bench, and never interposes an
adamantine syllable; and the most sincere and revolutionary doctrine,
put as if the ark of God were carried forward some furlongs, and
planted there for the succor of the world, shall in a few weeks be
coldly set aside by the same speaker, as morbid; "I thought I was
right, but I was not," -- and the same immeasurable credulity
demanded for new audacities.  If we were not of all opinions! if we
did not in any moment shift the platform on which we stand, and look
and speak from another! if there could be any regulation, any
`one-hour-rule,' that a man should never leave his point of view,
without sound of trumpet.  I am always insincere, as always knowing
there are other moods.

        How sincere and confidential we can be, saying all that lies in
the mind, and yet go away feeling that all is yet unsaid, from the
incapacity of the parties to know each other, although they use the
same words!  My companion assumes to know my mood and habit of
thought, and we go on from explanation to explanation, until all is
said which words can, and we leave matters just as they were at
first, because of that vicious assumption.  Is it that every man
believes every other to be an incurable partialist, and himself an
universalist?  I talked yesterday with a pair of philosophers: I
endeavored to show my good men that I love everything by turns, and
nothing long; that I loved the centre, but doated on the superficies;
that I loved man, if men seonsmustfurnishemed to me mice and rats;
that I revered saints, but woke up glad that the old pagan world
stood its ground, and died hard; that I was glad of men of every gift
and nobility, but would not live in their arms.  Could they but once
understand, that I loved to know that they existed, and heartily
wished them Godspeed, yet, out of my poverty of life and thought, had
no word or welcome for them when they came to see me, and could well
consent to their living in Oregon, for any claim I felt on them, it
would be a great satisfaction.

 
 
        _New England Reformers_
 
        _A Lecture read before the Society in Amory Hall,_
        _on Sunday, 3 March, 1844_

        Whoever has had opportunity of acquaintance with society in New
England, during the last twenty-five years, with those middle and
with those leading sections that may constitute any just
representation of the character and aim of the community, will have
been struck with the great activity of thought and experimenting.
His attention must be commanded by the signs that the Church, or
religious party, is falling from the church nominal, and is appearing
in temperance and non-resistance societies, in movements of
abolitionists and of socialists, and in very significant assemblies,
called Sabbath and Bible Conventions, -- composed of ultraists, of
seekers, of all the soul of the soldiery of dissent, and meeting to
call in question the authority of the Sabbath, of the priesthood, and
of the church.  In these movements, nothing was more remarkable than
the discontent they begot in the movers.  The spirit of protest and
of detachment, drove the members of these Conventions to bear
testimony against the church, and immediately afterward, to declare
their discontent with these Conventions, their independence of their
colleagues, and their impatience of the methods whereby they were
working.  They defied each other, like a congress of kings, each of
whom had a realm to rule, and a way of his own that made concert
unprofitable.  What a fertility of projects for the salvation of the
world! One apostle thought all men should go to farming; and another,
that no man should buy or sell: that the use of money was the
cardinal evil; another, that the mischief was in our diet, that we
eat and drink damnation.  These made unleavened bread, and were foes
to the death to fermentation.  It was in vain urged by the housewife,
that God made yeast, as well as dough, and loves fermentation just as
dearly as he loves vegetation; that fermentation develops the
saccharine element in the grain, and makes it more palatable and more
digestible.  No; they wish the pure wheat, and will die but it shall
not ferment.  Stop, dear nature, these incessant advances of thine;
let us scotch these ever-rolling wheels! Others attacked the system
of agriculture, the use of animal manures in farming; and the tyranny
of man over brute nature; these abuses polluted his food.  The ox
must be taken from the plough, and the horse from the cart, the
hundred acres of the farm must be spaded, and the man must walk
wherever boats and locomotives will not carry him.  Even the insect
world was to be defended, -- that had been too long neglected, and a
society for the protection of ground-worms, slugs, and mosquitos was
to be incorporated without delay.  With these appeared the adepts of
homoeopathy, of hydropathy, of mesmerism, of phrenology, and their
wonderful theories of the Christian miracles! Others assailed
particular vocations, as that of the lawyer, that of the merchant, of
the manufacturer, of the clergyman, of the scholar.  Others attacked
the institution of marriage, as the fountain of social evils.  Others
devoted themselves to the worrying of churches and meetings for
public worship; and the fertile forms of antinomianism among the
elder puritans, seemed to have their match in the plenty of the new
harvest of reform.  With this din of opinion and debate, there was a
keener scrutiny of institutions and domestic life than any we had
known, there was sincere protesting against existing evils, and there
were changes of employment dictated by conscience.  No doubt, there
was plentiful vaporing, and cases of backsliding might occur.  But in
each of these movements emerged a good result, a tendency to the
adoption of simpler methods, and an assertion of the sufficiency of
the private man.  Thus it was directly in the spirit and genius of
the age, what happened in one instance, when a church censured and
threatened to excommunicate one of its members, on account of the
somewhat hostile part to the church, which his conscience led him to
take in the anti-slavery business; the threatened individual
immediately excommunicated the church in a public and formal process.
This has been several times repeated: it was excellent when it was
done the first time, but, of course, loses all value when it is
copied.  Every project in the history of reform, no matter how
violent and surprising, is good, when it is the dictate of a man's
genius and constitution, but very dull and suspicious when adopted
from another.  It is right and beautiful in any man to say, `I will
take this coat, or this book, or this measure of corn of yours,' --
in whom we see the act to be original, and to flow from the whole
spirit and faith of him; for then that taking will have a giving as
free and divine: but we are very easily disposed to resist the same
generosity of speech, when we miss originality and truth to character
in it.  There was in all the practical activities of New England, for
the last quarter of a century, a gradual withdrawal of tender
consciences from the social organizations.  There is observable
throughout, the contest between mechanical and spiritual methods, but
with a steady tendency of the thoughtful and virtuous to a deeper
belief and reliance on spiritual facts.  In politics, for example, it
is easy to see the progress of dissent.  The country is full of
rebellion; the country is full of kings.  Hands off! let there be no
control and no interference in the administration of the affairs of
this kingdom of me.  Hence the growth of the doctrine and of the
party of Free Trade, and the willingness to try that experiment, in
the face of what appear incontestable facts.  I confess, the motto of
the Globe newspaper is so attractive to me, that I can seldom find
much appetite to read what is below it in its columns, "The world is
governed too much." So the country is frequently affording solitary
examples of resistance to the government, solitary nullifiers, who
throw themselves on their reserved rights; nay, who have reserved all
their rights; who reply to the assessor, and to the clerk of court,
that they do not know the State; and embarrass the courts of law, by
non-juring, and the commander-in-chief of the militia, by
non-resistance.  The same disposition to scrutiny and dissent
appeared in civil, festive, neighborly, and domestic society.  A
restless, prying, conscientious criticism broke out in unexpected
quarters.  Who gave me the money with which I bought my coat?  Why
should professional labor and that of the counting-house be paid so
disproportionately to the labor of the porter, and woodsawyer?  This
whole business of Trade gives me to pause and think, as it
constitutes false relations between men; inasmuch as I am prone to
count myself relieved of any responsibility to behave well and nobly
to that person whom I pay with money, whereas if I had not that
commodity, I should be put on my good behavior in all companies, and
man would be a benefactor to man, as being himself his only
certificate that he had a right to those aids and services which each
asked of the other.  Am I not too protected a person? is there not a
wide disparity between the lot of me and the lot of thee, my poor
brother, my poor sister?  Am I not defrauded of my best culture in
the loss of those gymnastics which manual labor and the emergencies
of poverty constitute?  I find nothing healthful or exalting in the
smooth conventions of society; I do not like the close air of
saloons.  I begin to suspect myself to be a prisoner, though treated
with all this courtesy and luxury.  I pay a destructive tax in my
conformity.  The same insatiable criticism may be traced in the
efforts for the reform of Education.  The popular education has been
taxed with a want of truth and nature.  It was complained that an
education to things was not given.  We are students of words: we are
shut up in schools, and colleges, and recitation-rooms, for ten or
fifteen years, and come out at last with a bag of wind, a memory of
words, and do not know a thing.  We cannot use our hands, or our
legs, or our eyes, or our arms.  We do not know an edible root in the
woods, we cannot tell our course by the stars, nor the hour of the
day by the sun.  It is well if we can swim and skate.  We are afraid
of a horse, of a cow, of a dog, of a snake, of a spider.  The Roman
rule was, to teach a boy nothing that he could not learn standing.
The old English rule was, `All summer in the field, and all winter in
the study.' And it seems as if a man should learn to plant, or to
fish, or to hunt, that he might secure his subsistence at all events,
and not be painful to his friends and fellow men.  The lessons of
science should be experimental also.  The sight of the planet through
a telescope, is worth all the course on astronomy: the shock of the
electric spark in the elbow, out-values all the theories; the taste
of the nitrous oxide, the firing of an artificial volcano, are better
than volumes of chemistry.  One of the traits of the new spirit, is
the inquisition it fixed on our scholastic devotion to the dead
languages.  The ancient languages, with great beauty of structure,
contain wonderful remains of genius, which draw, and always will
draw, certain likeminded men, -- Greek men, and Roman men, in all
countries, to their study; but by a wonderful drowsiness of usage,
they had exacted the study of _all_ men.  Once (say two centuries
ago), Latin and Greek had a strict relation to all the science and
culture there was in Europe, and the Mathematics had a momentary
importance at some era of activity in physical science.  These things
became stereotyped as _education,_ as the manner of men is.  But the
Good Spirit never cared for the colleges, and though all men and boys
were now drilled in Latin, Greek, and Mathematics, it had quite left
these shells high and dry on the beach, and was now creating and
feeding other matters at other ends of the world.  But in a hundred
high schools and colleges, this warfare against common sense still
goes on.  Four, or six, or ten years, the pupil is parsing Greek and
Latin, and as soon as he leaves the University, as it is ludicrously
called, he shuts those books for the last time.  Some thousands of
young men are graduated at our colleges in this country every year,
and the persons who, at forty years, still read Greek, can all be
counted on your hand.  I never met with ten.  Four or five persons I
have seen who read Plato.  But is not this absurd, that the whole
liberal talent of this country should be directed in its best years
on studies which lead to nothing?  What was the consequence?  Some
intelligent persons said or thought; `Is that Greek and Latin some
spell to conjure with, and not words of reason?  If the physician,
the lawyer, the divine, never use it to come at their ends, I need
never learn it to come at mine.  Conjuring is gone out of fashion,
and I will omit this conjugating, and go straight to affairs.' So
they jumped the Greek and Latin, and read law, medicine, or sermons,
without it.  To the astonishment of all, the self-made men took even
ground at once with the oldest of the regular graduates, and in a few
months the most conservative circles of Boston and New York had quite
forgotten who of their gownsmen was college-bred, and who was not.
One tendency appears alike in the philosophical speculation, and in
the rudest democratical movements, through all the petulance and all
the puerility, the wish, namely, to cast aside the superfluous, and
arrive at short methods, urged, as I suppose, by an intuition that
the human spirit is equal to all emergencies, alone, and that man is
more often injured than helped by the means he uses.  I conceive this
gradual casting off of material aids, and the indication of growing
trust in the private, self-supplied powers of the individual, to be
the affirmative principle of the recent philosophy: and that it is
feeling its own profound truth, and is reaching forward at this very
hour to the happiest conclusions.  I readily concede that in this, as
in every period of intellectual activity, there has been a noise of
denial and protest; much was to be resisted, much was to be got rid
of by those who were reared in the old, before they could begin to
affirm and to construct.  Many a reformer perishes in his removal of
rubbish, -- and that makes the offensiveness of the class.  They are
partial; they are not equal to the work they pretend.  They lose
their way; in the assault on the kingdom of darkness, they expend all
their energy on some accidental evil, and lose their sanity and power
of benefit.  It is of little moment that one or two, or twenty errors
of our social system be corrected, but of much that the man be in his
senses.  The criticism and attack on institutions which we have
witnessed, has made one thing plain, that society gains nothing
whilst a man, not himself renovated, attempts to renovate things
around him: he has become tediously good in some particular, but
negligent or narrow in the rest; and hypocrisy and vanity are often
the disgusting result.  It is handsomer to remain in the
establishment better than the establishment, and conduct that in the
best manner, than to make a sally against evil by some single
improvement, without supporting it by a total regeneration.  Do not
be so vain of your one objection.  Do you think there is only one?
Alas! my good friend, there is no part of society or of life better
than any other part.  All our things are right and wrong together.
The wave of evil washes all our institutions alike.  Do you complain
of our Marriage?  Our marriage is no worse than our education, our
diet, our trade, our social customs.  Do you complain of the laws of
Property?  It is a pedantry to give such importance to them.  Can we
not play the game of life with these counters, as well as with those;
in the institution of property, as well as out of it.  Let into it
the new and renewing principle of love, and property will be
universality.  No one gives the impression of superiority to the
institution, which he must give who will reform it.  It makes no
difference what you say: you must make me feel that you are aloof
from it; by your natural and super-natural advantages, do easily see
to the end of it, -- do see how man can do without it.  Now all men
are on one side.  No man deserves to be heard against property.  Only
Love, only an Idea, is against property, as we hold it.  I cannot
afford to be irritable and captious, nor to waste all my time in
attacks.  If I should go out of church whenever I hear a false
sentiment, I could never stay there five minutes.  But why come out?
the street is as false as the church, and when I get to my house, or
to my manners, or to my speech, I have not got away from the lie.
When we see an eager assailant of one of these wrongs, a special
reformer, we feel like asking him, What right have you, sir, to your
one virtue?  Is virtue piecemeal?  This is a jewel amidst the rags of
a beggar.  In another way the right will be vindicated.  In the midst
of abuses, in the heart of cities, in the aisles of false churches,
alike in one place and in another, -- wherever, namely, a just and
heroic soul finds itself, there it will do what is next at hand, and
by the new quality of character it shall put forth, it shall abrogate
that old condition, law or school in which it stands, before the law
of its own mind.  If partiality was one fault of the movement party,
the other defect was their reliance on Association.  Doubts such as
those I have intimated, drove many good persons to agitate the
questions of social reform.  But the revolt against the spirit of
commerce, the spirit of aristocracy, and the inveterate abuses of
cities, did not appear possible to individuals; and to do battle
against numbers, they armed themselves with numbers, and against
concert, they relied on new concert.  Following, or advancing beyond
the ideas of St.  Simon, of Fourier, and of Owen, three communities
have already been formed in Massachusetts on kindred plans, and many
more in the country at large.  They aim to give every member a share
in the manual labor, to give an equal reward to labor and to talent,
and to unite a liberal culture with an education to labor.  The
scheme offers, by the economies of associated labor and expense, to
make every member rich, on the same amount of property, that, in
separate families, would leave every member poor.  These new
associations are composed of men and women of superior talents and
sentiments: yet it may easily be questioned, whether such a community
will draw, except in its beginnings, the able and the good; whether
those who have energy, will not prefer their chance of superiority
and power in the world, to the humble certainties of the association;
whether such a retreat does not promise to become an assylum to those
who have tried and failed, rather than a field to the strong; and
whether the members will not necessarily be fractions of men, because
each finds that he cannot enter it, without some compromise.
Friendship and association are very fine things, and a grand phalanx
of the best of the human race, banded for some catholic object: yes,
excellent; but remember that no society can ever be so large as one
man.  He in his friendship, in his natural and momentary
associations, doubles or multiplies himself; but in the hour in which
he mortgages himself to two or ten or twenty, he dwarfs himself below
the stature of one.  But the men of less faith could not thus
believe, and to such, concert appears the sole specific of strength.
I have failed, and you have failed, but perhaps together we shall not
fail.  Our housekeeping is not satisfactory to us, but perhaps a
phalanx, a community, might be.  Many of us have differed in opinion,
and we could find no man who could make the truth plain, but possibly
a college, or an ecclesiastical council might.  I have not been able
either to persuade my brother or to prevail on myself, to disuse the
traffic or the potation of brandy, but perhaps a pledge of total
abstinence might effectually restrain us.  The candidate my party
votes for is not to be trusted with a dollar, but he will be honest
in the Senate, for we can bring public opinion to bear on him.  Thus
concert was the specific in all cases.  But concert is neither better
nor worse, neither more nor less potent than individual force.  All
the men in the world cannot make a statue walk and speak, cannot make
a drop of blood, or a blade of grass, any more than one man can.  But
let there be one man, let there be truth in two men, in ten men, then
is concert for the first time possible, because the force which moves
the world is a new quality, and can never be furnished by adding
whatever quantities of a different kind.  What is the use of the
concert of the false and the disunited?  There can be no concert in
two, where there is no concert in one.  When the individual is not
_individual,_ but is dual; when his thoughts look one way, and his
actions another; when his faith is traversed by his habits; when his
will, enlightened by reason, is warped by his sense; when with one
hand he rows, and with the other backs water, what concert can be?  I
do not wonder at the interest these projects inspire.  The world is
awaking to the idea of union, and these experiments show what it is
thinking of.  It is and will be magic.  Men will live and
communicate, and plough, and reap, and govern, as by added ethereal
power, when once they are united; as in a celebrated experiment, by
expiration and respiration exactly together, four persons lift a
heavy man from the ground by the little finger only, and without
sense of weight.  But this union must be inward, and not one of
covenants, and is to be reached by a reverse of the methods they use.
The union is only perfect, when all the uniters are isolated.  It is
the union of friends who live in different streets or towns.  Each
man, if he attempts to join himself to others, is on all sides
cramped and diminished of his proportion; and the stricter the union,
the smaller and the more pitiful he is.  But leave him alone, to
recognize in every hour and place the secret soul, he will go up and
down doing the works of a true member, and, to the astonishment of
all, the work will be done with concert, though no man spoke.
Government will be adamantine without any governor.  The union must
be ideal in actual individualism.  I pass to the indication in some
particulars of that faith in man, which the heart is preaching to us
in these days, and which engages the more regard, from the
consideration, that the speculations of one generation are the
history of the next following.  In alluding just now to our system of
education, I spoke of the deadness of its details.  But it is open to
graver criticism than the palsy of its members: it is a system of
despair.  The disease with which the human mind now labors, is want
of faith.  Men do not believe in a power of education.  We do not
think we can speak to divine sentiments in man, and we do not try.
We renounce all high aims.  We believe that the defects of so many
perverse and so many frivolous people, who make up society, are
organic, and society is a hospital of incurables.  A man of good
sense but of little faith, whose compassion seemed to lead him to
church as often as he went there, said to me; "that he liked to have
concerts, and fairs, and churches, and other public amusements go
on." I am afraid the remark is too honest, and comes from the same
origin as the maxim of the tyrant, "If you would rule the world
quietly, you must keep it amused." I notice too, that the ground on
which eminent public servants urge the claims of popular education is
fear: `This country is filling up with thousands and millions of
voters, and you must educate them to keep them from our throats.' We
do not believe that any education, any system of philosophy, any
influence of genius, will ever give depth of insight to a superficial
mind.  Having settled ourselves into this infidelity, our skill is
expended to procure alleviations, diversion, opiates.  We adorn the
victim with manual skill, his tongue with languages, his body with
inoffensive and comely manners.  So have we cunningly hid the tragedy
of limitation and inner death we cannot avert.  Is it strange that
society should be devoured by a secret melancholy, which breaks
through all its smiles, and all its gayety and games?  But even one
step farther our infidelity has gone.  It appears that some doubt is
felt by good and wise men, whether really the happiness and probity
of men is increased by the culture of the mind in those disciplines
to which we give the name of education.  Unhappily, too, the doubt
comes from scholars, from persons who have tried these methods.  In
their experience, the scholar was not raised by the sacred thoughts
amongst which he dwelt, but used them to selfish ends.  He was a
profane person, and became a showman, turning his gifts to a
marketable use, and not to his own sustenance and growth.  It was
found that the intellect could be independently developed, that is,
in separation from the man, as any single organ can be invigorated,
and the result was monstrous.  A canine appetite for knowledge was
generated, which must still be fed, but was never satisfied, and this
knowledge not being directed on action, never took the character of
substantial, humane truth, blessing those whom it entered.  It gave
the scholar certain powers of expression, the power of speech, the
power of poetry, of literary art, but it did not bring him to peace,
or to beneficence.  When the literary class betray a destitution of
faith, it is not strange that society should be disheartened and
sensualized by unbelief.  What remedy?  Life must be lived on a
higher plane.  We must go up to a higher platform, to which we are
always invited to ascend; there, the whole aspect of things changes.
I resist the skepticism of our education, and of our educated men.  I
do not believe that the differences of opinion and character in men
are organic.  I do not recognize, beside the class of the good and
the wise, a permanent class of skeptics, or a class of conservatives,
or of malignants, or of materialists.  I do not believe in two
classes.  You remember the story of the poor woman who importuned
King Philip of Macedon to grant her justice, which Philip refused:
the woman exclaimed, "I appeal": the king, astonished, asked to whom
she appealed: the woman replied, "from Philip drunk to Philip sober."
The text will suit me very well.  I believe not in two classes of
men, but in man in two moods, in Philip drunk and Philip sober.  I
think, according to the good-hearted word of Plato, "Unwillingly the
soul is deprived of truth." Iron conservative, miser, or thief, no
man is, but by a supposed necessity, which he tolerates by shortness
or torpidity of sight.  The soul lets no man go without some
visitations and holy-days of a diviner presence.  It would be easy to
show, by a narrow scanning of any man's biography, that we are not so
wedded to our paltry performances of every kind, but that every man
has at intervals the grace to scorn his performances, in comparing
them with his belief of what he should do, that he puts himself on
the side of his enemies, listening gladly to what they say of him,
and accusing himself of the same things.  What is it men love in
Genius, but its infinite hope, which degrades all it has done?
Genius counts all its miracles poor and short.  Its own idea it never
executed.  The Iliad, the Hamlet, the Doric column, the Roman arch,
the Gothic minster, the German anthem, when they are ended, the
master casts behind him.  How sinks the song in the waves of melody
which the universe pours over his soul! Before that gracious
Infinite, out of which he drew these few strokes, how mean they look,
though the praises of the world attend them.  From the triumphs of
his art, he turns with desire to this greater defeat.  Let those
admire who will.  With silent joy he sees himself to be capable of a
beauty that eclipses all which his hands have done, all which human
hands have ever done.  Well, we are all the children of genius, the
children of virtue, -- and feel their inspirations in our happier
hours.  Is not every man sometimes a radical in politics?  Men are
conservatives when they are least vigorous, or when they are most
luxurious.  They are conservatives after dinner, or before taking
their rest; when they are sick, or aged: in the morning, or when
their intellect or their conscience have been aroused, when they hear
music, or when they read poetry, they are radicals.  In the circle of
the rankest tories that could be collected in England, Old or New,
let a powerful and stimulating intellect, a man of great heart and
mind, act on them, and very quickly these frozen conservators will
yield to the friendly influence, these hopeless will begin to hope,
these haters will begin to love, these immovable statues will begin
to spin and revolve.  I cannot help recalling the fine anecdote which
Warton relates of Bishop Berkeley, when he was preparing to leave
England, with his plan of planting the gospel among the American
savages.  "Lord Bathurst told me, that the members of the Scriblerus
club, being met at his house at dinner, they agreed to rally
Berkeley, who was also his guest, on his scheme at Bermudas.
Berkeley, having listened to the many lively things they had to say,
begged to be heard in his turn, and displayed his plan with such an
astonishing and animating force of eloquence and enthusiasm, that
they were struck dumb, and, after some pause, rose up all together
with earnestness, exclaiming, `Let us set out with him immediately.'"
Men in all ways are better than they seem.  They like flattery for
the moment, but they know the truth for their own.  It is a foolish
cowardice which keeps us from trusting them, and speaking to them
rude truth.  They resent your honesty for an instant, they will thank
you for it always.  What is it we heartily wish of each other?  Is it
to be pleased and flattered?  No, but to be convicted and exposed, to
be shamed out of our nonsense of all kinds, and made men of, instead
of ghosts and phantoms.  We are weary of gliding ghostlike through
the world, which is itself so slight and unreal.  We crave a sense of
reality, though it come in strokes of pain.  I explain so, -- by this
manlike love of truth, -- those excesses and errors into which souls
of great vigor, but not equal insight, often fall.  They feel the
poverty at the bottom of all the seeming affluence of the world.
They know the speed with which they come straight through the thin
masquerade, and conceive a disgust at the indigence of nature:
Rousseau, Mirabeau, Charles Fox, Napoleon, Byron, -- and I could
easily add names nearer home, of raging riders, who drive their
steeds so hard, in the violence of living to forget its illusion:
they would know the worst, and tread the floors of hell.  The heroes
of ancient and modern fame, Cimon, Themistocles, Alcibiades,
Alexander, Caesar, have treated life and fortune as a game to be well
and skillfully played, but the stake not to be so valued, but that
any time, it could be held as a trifle light as air, and thrown up.
Caesar, just before the battle of Pharsalia, discourses with the
Egyptian priest, concerning the fountains of the Nile, and offers to
quit the army, the empire, and Cleopatra, if he will show him those
mysterious sources. The same magnanimity shows itself in our social
relations, in the preference, namely, which each man gives to the
society of superiors over that of his equals.  All that a man has,
will he give for right relations with his mates.  All that he has,
will he give for an erect demeanor in every company and on each
occasion.  He aims at such things as his neighbors prize, and gives
his days and nights, his talents and his heart, to strike a good
stroke, to acquit himself in all men's sight as a man.  The
consideration of an eminent citizen, of a noted merchant, of a man of
mark in his profession; naval and military honor, a general's
commission, a marshal's baton, a ducal coronet, the laurel of poets,
and, anyhow procured, the acknowledgment of eminent merit, have this
lustre for each candidate, that they enable him to walk erect and
unashamed, in the presence of some persons, before whom he felt
himself inferior.  Having raised himself to this rank, having
established his equality with class after class, of those with whom
he would live well, he still finds certain others, before whom he
cannot possess himself, because they have somewhat fairer, somewhat
grander, somewhat purer, which extorts homage of him.  Is his
ambition pure? then, will his laurels and his possessions seem
worthless: instead of avoiding these men who make his fine gold dim,
he will cast all behind him, and seek their society only, woo and
embrace this his humiliation and mortification, until he shall know
why his eye sinks, his voice is husky, and his brilliant talents are
paralyzed in this presence.  He is sure that the soul which gives the
lie to all things, will tell none.  His constitution will not mislead
him.  If it cannot carry itself as it ought, high and unmatchable in
the presence of any man, if the secret oracles whose whisper makes
the sweetness and dignity of his life, do here withdraw and
accompany, him no longer, it is time to undervalue what he has
valued, to dispossess himself of what he has acquired, and with
Caesar to take in his hand the army, the empire, and Cleopatra, and
say, `All these will I relinquish, if you will show me the fountains
of the Nile.' Dear to us are those who love us, the swift moments we
spend with them are a compensation for a great deal of misery they
enlarge our life; -- but dearer are those who reject us as unworthy,
for they add another life: they build a heaven before us, whereof we
had not dreamed, and thereby supply to us new powers out of the
recesses of the spirit, and urge us to new and unattempted
performances.  As every man at heart wishes the best and not inferior
society, wishes to be convicted of his error, and to come to himself,
so he wishes that the same healing should not stop in his thought,
but should penetrate his will or active power.  The selfish man
suffers more from his selfishness, than he from whom that selfishness
withholds some important benefit.  What he most wishes is to be
lifted to some higher platform, that he may see beyond his present
fear the transalpine good, so that his fear, his coldness, his custom
may be broken up like fragments of ice, melted and carried away in
the great stream of good will.  Do you ask my aid?  I also wish to be
a benefactor.  I wish more to be a benefactor and servant, than you
wish to be served by me, and surely the greatest good fortune that
could befall me, is precisely to be so moved by you that I should
say, `Take me and all nine, and use me and mine freely to your ends'!
for, I could not say it, otherwise than because a great enlargement
had come to my heart and mind, which made me superior to my fortunes.
Here we are paralyzed with fear; we hold on to our little properties,
house and land, office and money, for the bread which they have in
our experience yielded us, although we confess, that our being does
not flow through them.  We desire to be made great, we desire to be
touched with that fire which shall command this ice to stream, and
make our existence a benefit.  If therefore we start objections to
your project, O friend of the slave, or friend of the poor, or of the
race, understand well, that it is because we wish to drive you to
drive us into your measures.  We wish to hear ourselves confuted.  We
are haunted with a belief that you have a secret, which it would
highliest advantage us to learn, and we would force you to impart it
to us, though it should bring us to prison, or to worse extremity.
Nothing shall warp me from the belief, that every man is a lover of
truth.  There is no pure lie, no pure malignity in nature.  The
entertainment of the proposition of depravity is the last profligacy
and profanation.  There is no skepticism, no atheism but that.  Could
it be received into common belief, suicide would unpeople the planet.
It has had a name to live in some dogmatic theology, but each man's
innocence and his real liking of his neighbor, have kept it a dead
letter.  I remember standing at the polls one day, when the anger of
the political contest gave a certain grimness to the faces of the
independent electors, and a good man at my side looking on the
people, remarked, "I am satisfied that the largest part of these men,
on either side, mean to vote right." I suppose, considerate observers
looking at the masses of men, in their blameless, and in their
equivocal actions, will assent, that in spite of selfishness and
frivolity, the general purpose in the great number of persons is
fidelity.  The reason why any one refuses his assent to your opinion,
or his aid to your benevolent design, is in you: he refuses to accept
you as a bringer of truth, because, though you think you have it, he
feels that you have it not.  You have not given him the authentic
sign.  If it were worth while to run into details this general
doctrine of the latent but ever soliciting Spirit, it would be easy
to adduce illustration in particulars of a man's equality to the
church, of his equality to the state, and of his equality to every
other man.  It is yet in all men's memory, that, a few years ago, the
liberal churches complained, that the Calvinistic church denied to
them the name of Christian.  I think the complaint was confession: a
religious church would not complain.  A religious man like Behmen,
Fox, or Swedenborg, is not irritated by wanting the sanction of the
church, but the church feels the accusation of his presence and
belief.  It only needs, that a just man should walk in our streets,
to make it appear how pitiful and inartificial a contrivance is our
legislation.  The man whose part is taken, and who does not walt for
society in anything, has a power which society cannot choose but
feel.  The familiar experiment, called the hydrostatic paradox, in
which a capillary column of water balances the ocean, is a symbol of
the relation of one man to the whole family of men.  The wise
Dandini, on hearing the lives of Socrates, Pythagoras, and Diogenes
read, "judged them to be great men every way, excepting, that they
were too much subjected to the reverence of the laws, which to second
and authorize, true virtue must abate very, much of its original
vigor."  And as a man is equal to the church, and equal to the state,
so he is equal to every other man.  The disparities of power in men
are superficial; and all frank and searching conversation, in which a
man lays himself open to his brother, apprizes each of their radical
unity.  When two persons sit and converse in a thoroughly good
understanding, the remark is sure to be made, See how we have
disputed about words! Let a clear, apprehensive mind, such as every
man knows among his friends, converse with the most commanding poetic
genius, I think, it would appear that there was no inequality such as
men fancy between them; that a perfect understanding, a like
receiving, a like perceiving, abolished differences, and the poet
would confess, that his creative imagination gave him no deep
advantage, but only the superficial one, that he could express
himself, and the other could not; that his advantage was a knack,
which might impose on indolent men, but could not impose on lovers of
truth; for they know the tax of talent, or, what a price of greatness
the power of expression too often pays.  I believe it is the
conviction of the purest men, that the net amount of man and man does
not much vary.  Each is incomparably superior to his companion in
some faculty.  His want of skill in other directions, has added to
his fitness for his own work.  Each seems to have some compensation
yielded to him by his infirmity, and every hindrance operates as a
concentration of his force. These and the like experiences intimate,
that man stands in strict connexion with a higher fact never yet
manifested.  There is power over and behind us, and we are the
channels of its communications.  We seek to say thus and so, and over
our head some spirit sits, which contradicts what we say.  We would
persuade our fellow to this or that; another self within our eyes
dissuades him.  That which we keep back, this reveals.  In vain we
compose our faces and our words; it holds uncontrollable
communication with the enemy, and he answers civilly to us, but
believes the spirit.  We exclaim, `There's a traitor in the house!'
but at last it appears that he is the true man, and I am the traitor.
This open channel to the highest life is the first and last reality,
so subtle, so quiet, yet so tenacious, that although I have never
expressed the truth, and although I have never heard the expression
of it from any other, I know that the whole truth is here for me.
What if I cannot answer your questions?  I am not pained that I
cannot frame a reply to the question, What is the operation we call
Providence?  There lies the unspoken thing, present, omnipresent.
Every time we converse, we seek to translate it into speech, but
whether we hit, or whether we miss, we have the fact.  Every
discourse is an approximate answer: but it is of small consequence,
that we do not get it into verbs and nouns, whilst it abides for
contemplation forever.  If the auguries of the prophesying heart
shall make themselves good in time, the man who shall be born, whose
advent men and events prepare and foreshow, is one who shall enjoy
his connexion with a higher life, with the man within man; shall
destroy distrust by his trust, shall use his native but forgotten
methods, shall not take counsel of flesh and blood, but shall rely on
the Law alive and beautiful, which works over our heads and under our
feet.  Pitiless, it avails itself of our success, when we obey it,
and of our ruin, when we contravene it.  Men are all secret believers
in it, else, the word justice would have no meaning: they believe
that the best is the true; that right is done at last; or chaos would
come.  It rewards actions after their nature, and not after the
design of the agent.  `Work,' it saith to man, `in every hour, paid
or unpaid, see only that thou work, and thou canst not escape the
reward: whether thy work be fine or coarse, planting corn, or writing
epics, so only it be honest work, done to thine own approbation, it
shall earn a reward to the senses as well as to the thought: no
matter, how often defeated, you are born to victory.  The reward of a
thing well done, is to have done it.' As soon as a man is wonted to
look beyond surfaces, and to see how this high will prevails without
an exception or an interval, he settles himself into serenity.  He
can already rely on the laws of gravity, that every stone will fall
where it is due; the good globe is faithful, and carries us securely
through the celestial spaces, anxious or resigned: we need not
interfere to help it on, and he will learn, one day, the mild lesson
they teach, that our own orbit is all our task, and we need not
assist the administration of the universe.  Do not be so impatient to
set the town right concerning the unfounded pretensions and the false
reputation of certain men of standing.  They are laboring harder to
set the town right concerning themselves, and will certainly succeed.
Suppress for a few days your criticism on the insufficiency of this
or that teacher or experimenter, and he will have demonstrated his
insufficiency to all men's eyes.  In like manner, let a man fall into
the divine circuits, and he is enlarged.  Obedience to his genius is
the only liberating influence.  We wish to escape from subjection,
and a sense of inferiority, -- and we make self-denying ordinances,
we drink water, we eat grass, we refuse the laws, we go to jail: it
is all in vain; only by obedience to his genius; only by the freest
activity in the way constitutional to him, does an angel seem to
arise before a man, and lead him by the hand out of all the wards of
the prison.  That which befits us, embosomed in beauty and wonder as
we are, is cheerfulness and courage, and the endeavor to realize our
aspirations.  The life of man is the true romance, which, when it is
valiantly conducted, will yield the imagination a higher joy than any
fiction.  All around us, what powers are wrapped up under the coarse
mattings of custom, and all wonder prevented.  It is so wonderful to
our neurologists that a man can see without his eyes, that it does
not occur to them, that it is just as wonderful, that he should see
with them; and that is ever the difference between the wise and the
unwise: the latter wonders at what is unusual, the wise man wonders
at the usual.  Shall not the heart which has received so much, trust
the Power by which it lives?  May it not quit other leadings, and
listen to the Soul that has guided it so gently, and taught it so
much, secure that the future will be worthy of the past?

.
        THE YOUNG AMERICAN
 
        _A Lecture read before the Mercantile Library Association,
        Boston, February 7, 1844_

        GENTLEMEN:
        It is remarkable, that our people have their intellectual cne
country, and their duties from another.  This false state of things
is newly in a way to be corrected.  America is beginning to assert
itself to the senses and to the imagination of her children, and
Europe is receding in the same degree.  This their reaction on
education gives a new importance to the internal improvements and to
the politics of the country.  Who has not been stimulated to
reflection by the facilities now in progress of construction for
travel and the transportation of goods in the United States?

        This rage for road building is beneficent for America, where
vast distance is so main a consideration in our domestic politics and
trade, inasmuch as the great political promise of the invention is to
hold the Union staunch, whose days seemed already numbered by the
mere inconvenience of transporting representatives, judges, and
officers across such tedious distances of land and water.  Not only
is distance annihilated, but when, as now, the locomotive and the
steamboat, like enormous shuttles, shoot every day across the
thousand various threads of national descent and employment, and bind
them fast in one web, an hourly assimilation goes forward, and there
is no danger that local peculiarities and hostilities should be
preserved.

        1. But I hasten to speak of the utility of these improvements
in creating an American sentiment.  An unlooked for consequence of
the railroad, is the increased acquaintance it has given the American
people with the boundless resources of their own soil.  If this
invention has reduced England to a third of its size, by bringing
people so much nearer, in this country it has given a new celerity to
_time_, or anticipated by fifty years the planting of tracts of land,
the choice of water privileges, the working of mines, and other
natural advantages.  Railroad iron is a magician's rod, in its power
to evoke the sleeping energies of land and water.

        The railroad is but one arrow in our quiver, though it has
great value as a sort of yard-stick, and surveyor's line.  The
bountiful continent is ours, state on state, and territory on
territory, to the waves of the Pacific sea;

        "Our garden is the immeasurable earth,
        The heaven's blue pillars are Medea's house."

        The task of surveying, planting, and building upon this immense
tract, requires an education and a sentiment commensurate thereto.  A
consciousness of this fact, is beginning to take the place of the
purely trading spirit and education which sprang up whilst all the
population lived on the fringe of sea-coast.  And even on the coast,
prudent men have begun to see that every American should be educated
with a view to the values of land.  The arts of engineering and of
architecture are studied; scientific agriculture is an object of
growing attention; the mineral riches are explored; limestone, coal,
slate, and iron; and the value of timber-lands is enhanced.

        Columbus alleged as a reason for seeking a continent in the
West, that the harmony of nature required a great tract of land in
the western hemisphere, to balance the known extent of land in the
eastern; and it now appears that we must estimate the native values
of this broad region to redress the balance of our own judgments, and
appreciate the advantages opened to the human race in this country,
which is our fortunate home.  The land is the appointed remedy for
whatever is false and fantastic in our culture.  The continent we
inhabit is to be physic and food for our mind, as well as our body.
The land, with its tranquilizing, sanative influences, is to repair
the errors of a scholastic and traditional education, and bring us
into just relations with men and things.

        The habit of living in the presence of these invitations of
natural wealth is not inoperative; and this habit, combined with the
moral sentiment which, in the recent years, has interrogated every
institution, usage, and law, has, naturally, given a strong direction
to the wishes and aims of active young men to withdraw from cities,
and cultivate the soil.  This inclination has appeared in the most
unlooked for quarters, in men supposed to be absorbed in business,
and in those connected with the liberal professions.  And, since the
walks of trade were crowded, whilst that of agriculture cannot easily
be, inasmuch as the farmer who is not wanted by others can yet grow
his own bread, whilst the manufacturer or the trader, who is not
wanted, cannot, -- this seemed a happy tendency.  For, beside all the
moral benefit which we may expect from the farmer's profession, when
a man enters it considerately, this promised the conquering of the
soil, plenty, and beyond this, the adorning of the country with every
advantage and ornament which labor, ingenuity, and affection for a
man's home, could suggest.

        Meantime, with cheap land, and the pacific disposition of the
people, every thing invites to the arts of agriculture, of gardening,
and domestic architecture.  Public gardens, on the scale of such
plantations in Europe and Asia, are now unknown to us.  There is no
feature of the old countries that strikes an American with more
agreeable surprise than the beautiful gardens of Europe; such as the
Boboli in Florence, the Villa Borghese in Rome, the Villa d'Este in
Tivoli, the gardens at Munich, and at Frankfort on the Maine: works
easily imitated here, and which might well make the land dear to the
citizen, and inflame patriotism.  It is the fine art which is left
for us, now that sculpture, painting, and religious and civil
architecture have become effete, and have passed into second
childhood.  We have twenty degrees of latitude wherein to choose a
seat, and the new modes of travelling enlarge the opportunity of
selection, by making it easy to cultivate very distant tracts, and
yet remain in strict intercourse with the centres of trade and
population.  And the whole force of all the arts goes to facilitate
the decoration of lands and dwellings.  A garden has this advantage,
that it makes it indifferent where you live.  A well-laid garden
makes the face of the country of no account; let that be low or high,
grand or mean, you have made a beautiful abode worthy of man.  If the
landscape is pleasing, the garden shows it, -- if tame, it excludes
it.  A little grove, which any farmer can find, or cause to grow near
his house, will, in a few years, make cataracts and chains of
mountains quite unnecessary to his scenery; and he is so contented
with his alleys, woodlands, orchards, and river, that Niagara, and
the Notch of the White Hills, and Nantasket Beach, are superfluities.
And yet the selection of a fit houselot has the same advantage over
an indifferent one, as the selection to a given employment of a man
who has a genius for that work.  In the last case, the culture of
years will never make the most painstaking apprentice his equal: no
more will gardening give the advantage of a happy site to a house in
a hole or on a pinnacle.  In America, we have hitherto little to
boast in this kind.  The cities drain the country of the best part of
its population: the flower of the youth, of both sexes, goes into the
towns, and the country is cultivated by a so much inferior class.
The land, -- travel a whole day together, -- looks poverty-stricken,
and the buildings plain and poor.  In Europe, where society has an
aristocratic structure, the land is full of men of the best stock,
and the best culture, whose interest and pride it is to remain half
the year on their estates, and to fill them with every convenience
and ornament.  Of course, these make model farms, and model
architecture, and are a constant education to the eye of the
surrounding population.  Whatever events in progress shall go to
disgust men with cities, and infuse into them the passion for country
life, and country pleasures, will render a service to the whole face
of this continent, and will further the most poetic of all the
occupations of real life, the bringing out by art the native but
hidden graces of the landscape.

        I look on such improvements, also, as directly tending to
endear the land to the inhabitant.  Any relation to the land, the
habit of tilling it, or mining it, or even hunting on it, generates
the feeling of patriotism.  He who keeps shop on it, or he who merely
uses it as a support to his desk and ledger, or to his manufactory,
values it less.  The vast majority of the people of this country live
by the land, and carry its quality in their manners and opinions.  We
in the Atlantic states, by position, have been commercial, and have,
as I said, imbibed easily an European culture.  Luckily for us, now
that steam has narrowed the Atlantic to a strait, the nervous, rocky
West is intruding a new and continental element into the national
mind, and we shall yet have an American genius.  How much better when
the whole land is a garden, and the people have grown up in the
bowers of a paradise.  Without looking, then, to those extraordinary
social influences which are now acting in precisely this direction,
but only at what is inevitably doing around us, I think we must
regard the _land_ as a commanding and increasing power on the
citizen, the sanative and Americanizing influence, which promises to
disclose new virtues for ages to come.

        2. In the second place, the uprise and culmination of the new
and anti-feudal power of Commerce, is the political fact of most
significance to the American at this hour.

        We cannot look on the freedom of this country, in connexion
with its youth, without a presentiment that here shall laws and
institutions exist on some scale of proportion to the majesty of
nature.  To men legislating for the area betwixt the two oceans,
betwixt the snows and the tropics, somewhat of the gravity of nature
will infuse itself into the code.  A heterogeneous population
crowding on all ships from all corners of the world to the great
gates of North America, namely, Boston, New York, and New Orleans,
and thence proceeding inward to the prairie and the mountains, and
quickly contributing their private thought to the public opinion,
their toll to the treasury, and their vote to the election, it cannot
be doubted that the legislation of this country should become more
catholic and cosmopolitan than that of any other.  It seems so easy
for America to inspire and express the most expansive and humane
spirit; new-born, free, healthful, strong, the land of the laborer,
of the democrat, of the philanthropist, of the believer, of the
saint, she should speak for the human race.  It is the country of the
Future.  From Washington, proverbially `the city of magnificent
distances,' through all its cities, states, and territories, it is a
country of beginnings, of projects, of designs, and expectations.

        Gentlemen, there is a sublime and friendly Destiny by which the
human race is guided, -- the race never dying, the individual never
spared, -- to results affecting masses and ages.  Men are narrow and
selfish, but the Genius or Destiny is not narrow, but beneficent.  It
is not discovered in their calculated and voluntary activity, but in
what befalls, with or without their design.  Only what is inevitable
interests us, and it turns out that love and good are inevitable, and
in the course of things.  That Genius has infused itself into nature.
It indicates itself by a small excess of good, a small balance in
brute facts always favorable to the side of reason.  All the facts in
any part of nature shall be tabulated, and the results shall indicate
the same security and benefit; so slight as to be hardly observable,
and yet it is there.  The sphere is flattened at the poles, and
swelled at the equator; a form flowing necessarily from the fluid
state, yet _the_ form, the mathematician assures us, required to
prevent the protuberances of the continent, or even of lesser
mountains cast up at any time by earthquakes, from continually
deranging the axis of the earth.  The census of the population is
found to keep an invariable equality in the sexes, with a trifling
predominance in favor of the male, as if to counterbalance the
necessarily increased exposure of male life in war, navigation, and
other accidents.  Remark the unceasing effort throughout nature at
somewhat better than the actual creatures: _amelioration in nature_,
which alone permits and authorizes amelioration in mankind.  The
population of the world is a conditional population; these are not
the best, but the best that could live in the existing state of
soils, gases, animals, and morals: the best that could _yet_ live;
there shall be a better, please God.  This Genius, or Destiny, is of
the sternest administration, though rumors exist of its secret
tenderness.  It may be styled a cruel kindness, serving the whole
even to the ruin of the member; a terrible communist, reserving all
profits to the community, without dividend to individuals.  Its law
is, you shall have everything as a member, nothing to yourself.  For
Nature is the noblest engineer, yet uses a grinding economy, working
up all that is wasted to-day into to-morrow's creation; -- not a
superfluous grain of sand, for all the ostentation she makes of
expense and public works.  It is because Nature thus saves and uses,
laboring for the general, that we poor particulars are so crushed and
straitened, and find it so hard to live.  She flung us out in her
plenty, but we cannot shed a hair, or a paring of a nail, but
instantly she snatches at the shred, and appropriates it to the
general stock.  Our condition is like that of the poor wolves: if one
of the flock wound himself, or so much as limp, the rest eat him up
incontinently.

        That serene Power interposes the check upon the caprices and
officiousness of our wills.  Its charity is not our charity.  One of
its agents is our will, but that which expresses itself in our will,
is stronger than our will.  We are very forward to help it, but it
will not be accelerated.  It resists our meddling, eleemosynary
contrivances.  We devise sumptuary and relief laws, but the principle
of population is always reducing wages to the lowest pittance on
which human life can be sustained.  We legislate against forestalling
and monopoly; we would have a common granary for the poor; but the
selfishness which hoards the corn for high prices, is the preventive
of famine; and the law of self-preservation is surer policy than any
legislation can be.  We concoct eleemosynary systems, and it turns
out that our charity increases pauperism.  We inflate our paper
currency, we repair commerce with unlimited credit, and are presently
visited with unlimited bankruptcy.

        It is easy to see that the existing generation are conspiring
with a beneficence, which, in its working for coming generations,
sacrifices the passing one, which infatuates the most selfish men to
act against their private interest for the public welfare.  We build
railroads, we know not for what or for whom; but one thing is
certain, that we who build will receive the very smallest share of
benefit.  Benefit will accrue; they are essential to the country, but
that will be felt not until we are no longer countrymen.  We do the
like in all matters: --

        "Man's heart the Almighty to the Future set By secret and
inviolable springs."

        We plant trees, we build stone houses, we redeem the waste, we
make prospective laws, we found colleges and hospitals, for remote
generations.  We should be mortified to learn that the little benefit
we chanced in our own persons to receive was the utmost they would
yield.

        The history of commerce, is the record of this beneficent
tendency.  The patriarchal form of government readily becomes
despotic, as each person may see in his own family.  Fathers wish to
be the fathers of the minds of their children, and behold with
impatience a new character and way of thinking presuming to show
itself in their own son or daughter.  This feeling, which all their
love and pride in the powers of their children cannot subdue, becomes
petulance and tyranny when the head of the clan, the emperor of an
empire, deals with the same difference of opinion in his subjects.
Difference of opinion is the one crime which kings never forgive.  An
empire is an immense egotism.  "I am the State," said the French
Louis.  When a French ambassador mentioned to Paul of Russia, that a
man of consequence in St. Petersburg was interesting himself in some
matter, the Czar interrupted him, -- "There is no man of consequence
in this empire, but he with whom I am actually speaking; and so long
only as I am speaking to him, is he of any consequence."  And
Nicholas, the present emperor, is reported to have said to his
council, "The age is embarrassed with new opinions; rely on me,
gentlemen, I shall oppose an iron will to the progress of liberal
opinions."

        It is easy to see that this patriarchal or family management
gets to be rather troublesome to all but the papa; the sceptre comes
to be a crowbar.  And this unpleasant egotism, Feudalism opposes, and
finally destroys.  The king is compelled to call in the aid of his
brothers and cousins, and remote relations, to help him keep his
overgrown house in order; and this club of noblemen always come at
last to have a will of their own; they combine to brave the
sovereign, and call in the aid of the people.  Each chief attaches as
many followers as he can, by kindness, maintenance, and gifts; and as
long as war lasts, the nobles, who must be soldiers, rule very well.
But when peace comes, the nobles prove very whimsical and
uncomfortable masters; their frolics turn out to be insulting and
degrading to the commoner.  Feudalism grew to be a bandit and
brigand.

        Meantime Trade had begun to appear: Trade, a plant which grows
wherever there is peace, as soon as there is peace, and as long as
there is peace.  The luxury and necessity of the noble fostered it.
And as quickly as men go to foreign parts, in ships or caravans, a
new order of things springs up; new command takes place, new servants
and new masters.  Their information, their wealth, their
correspondence, have made them quite other men than left their native
shore.  _They_ are nobles now, and by another patent than the king's.
Feudalism had been good, had broken the power of the kings, and had
some good traits of its own; but it had grown mischievous, it was
time for it to die, and, as they say of dying people, all its faults
came out.  Trade was the strong man that broke it down, and raised a
new and unknown power in its place.  It is a new agent in the world,
and one of great function; it is a very intellectual force.  This
displaces physical strength, and instals computation, combination,
information, science, in its room.  It calls out all force of a
certain kind that slumbered in the former dynasties.  It is now in
the midst of its career.  Feudalism is not ended yet.  Our
governments still partake largely of that element.  Trade goes to
make the governments insignificant, and to bring every kind of
faculty of every individual that can in any manner serve any person,
_on sale_.  Instead of a huge Army and Navy, and Executive
Departments, it converts Government into an Intelligence-Office,
where every man may find what he wishes to buy, and expose what he
has to sell, not only produce and manufactures, but art, skill, and
intellectual and moral values.  This is the good and this the evil of
trade, that it would put everything into market, talent, beauty,
virtue, and man himself.

        By this means, however, it has done its work.  It has its
faults, and will come to an end, as the others do.  The philosopher
and lover of man have much harm to say of trade; but the historian
will see that trade was the principle of Liberty; that trade planted
America and destroyed Feudalism; that it makes peace and keeps peace,
and it will abolish slavery.  We complain of its oppression of the
poor, and of its building up a new aristocracy on the ruins of the
aristocracy it destroyed.  But the aristocracy of trade has no
permanence, is not entailed, was the result of toil and talent, the
result of merit of some kind, and is continually falling, like the
waves of the sea, before new claims of the same sort.  Trade is an
instrument in the hands of that friendly Power which works for us in
our own despite.  We design it thus and thus; it turns out otherwise
and far better.  This beneficent tendency, omnipotent without
violence, exists and works.  Every line of history inspires a
confidence that we shall not go far wrong; that things mend.  That is
the moral of all we learn, that it warrants Hope, the prolific mother
of reforms.  Our part is plainly not to throw ourselves across the
track, to block improvement, and sit till we are stone, but to watch
the uprise of successive mornings, and to conspire with the new works
of new days.  Government has been a fossil; it should be a plant.  I
conceive that the office of statute law should be to express, and not
to impede the mind of mankind.  New thoughts, new things.  Trade was
one instrument, but Trade is also but for a time, and must give way
to somewhat broader and better, whose signs are already dawning in
the sky.

        3. I pass to speak of the signs of that which is the sequel of
trade.

        In consequence of the revolution in the state of society
wrought by trade, Government in our times is beginning to wear a
clumsy and cumbrous appearance.  We have already seen our way to
shorter methods.  The time is full of good signs.  Some of them shall
ripen to fruit.  All this beneficent socialism is a friendly omen,
and the swelling cry of voices for the education of the people,
indicates that Government has other offices than those of banker and
executioner.  Witness the new movements in the civilized world, the
Communism of France, Germany, and Switzerland; the Trades' Unions;
the English League against the Corn Laws; and the whole _Industrial
Statistics_, so called.  In Paris, the blouse, the badge of the
operative, has begun to make its appearance in the saloons.  Witness,
too, the spectacle of three Communities which have within a very
short time sprung up within this Commonwealth, besides several others
undertaken by citizens of Massachusetts within the territory of other
States.  These proceeded from a variety of motives, from an
impatience of many usages in common life, from a wish for greater
freedom than the manners and opinions of society permitted, but in
great part from a feeling that the true offices of the State, the
State had let fall to the ground; that in the scramble of parties for
the public purse, the main duties of government were omitted, -- the
duty to instruct the ignorant, to supply the poor with work and with
good guidance.  These communists preferred the agricultural life as
the most favorable condition for human culture; but they thought that
the farm, as we manage it, did not satisfy the right ambition of man.
The farmer after sacrificing pleasure, taste, freedom, thought, love,
to his work, turns out often a bankrupt, like the merchant.  This
result might well seem astounding.  All this drudgery, from
cockcrowing to starlight, for all these years, to end in mortgages
and the auctioneer's flag, and removing from bad to worse.  It is
time to have the thing looked into, and with a sifting criticism
ascertained who is the fool.  It seemed a great deal worse, because
the farmer is living in the same town with men who pretend to know
exactly what he wants.  On one side, is agricultural chemistry,
coolly exposing the nonsense of our spendthrift agriculture and
ruinous expense of manures, and offering, by means of a teaspoonful
of artificial guano, to turn a sandbank into corn; and, on the other,
the farmer, not only eager for the information, but with bad crops
and in debt and bankruptcy, for want of it.  Here are Etzlers and
mechanical projectors, who, with the Fourierists, undoubtingly affirm
that the smallest union would make every man rich; -- and, on the
other side, a multitude of poor men and women seeking work, and who
cannot find enough to pay their board.  The science is confident, and
surely the poverty is real.  If any means could be found to bring
these two together!

        This was one design of the projectors of the Associations which
are now making their first feeble experiments.  They were founded in
love, and in labor.  They proposed, as you know, that all men should
take a part in the manual toil, and proposed to amend the condition
of men, by substituting harmonious for hostile industry.  It was a
noble thought of Fourier, which gives a favorable idea of his system,
to distinguish in his Phalanx a class as the Sacred Band, by whom
whatever duties were disagreeable, and likely to be omitted, were to
be assumed.

        At least, an economical success seemed certain for the
enterprise, and that agricultural association must, sooner or later,
fix the price of bread, and drive single farmers into association, in
self-defence; as the great commercial and manufacturing companies had
already done.  The Community is only the continuation of the same
movement which made the joint-stock companies for manufactures,
mining, insurance, banking, and so forth.  It has turned out cheaper
to make calico by companies; and it is proposed to plant corn, and to
bake bread by companies.

        Undoubtedly, abundant mistakes will be made by these first
adventurers, which will draw ridicule on their schemes.  I think, for
example, that they exaggerate the importance of a favorite project of
theirs, that of paying talent and labor at one rate, paying all sorts
of service at one rate, say ten cents the hour.  They have paid it
so; but not an instant would a dime remain a dime.  In one hand it
became an eagle as it fell, and in another hand a copper cent.  For
the whole value of the dime is in knowing what to do with it.  One
man buys with it a land-title of an Indian, and makes his posterity
princes; or buys corn enough to feed the world; or pen, ink, and
paper, or a painter's brush, by which he can communicate himself to
the human race as if he were fire; and the other buys barley candy.
Money is of no value; it cannot spend itself.  All depends on the
skill of the spender.  Whether, too, the objection almost universally
felt by such women in the community as were mothers, to an associate
life, to a common table, and a common nursery, &c., setting a higher
value on the private family with poverty, than on an association with
wealth, will not prove insuperable, remains to be determined.

        But the Communities aimed at a higher success in securing to
all their members an equal and thorough education.  And on the whole,
one may say, that aims so generous, and so forced on them by the
times, will not be relinquished, even if these attempts fail, but
will be prosecuted until they succeed.

        This is the value of the Communities; not what they have done,
but the revolution which they indicate as on the way.  Yes,
Government must educate the poor man.  Look across the country from
any hill-side around us, and the landscape seems to crave Government.
The actual differences of men must be acknowledged, and met with love
and wisdom.  These rising grounds which command the champaign below,
seem to ask for lords, true lords, _land_-lords, who understand the
land and its uses, and the applicabilities of men, and whose
government would be what it should, namely, mediation between want
and supply.  How gladly would each citizen pay a commission for the
support and continuation of good guidance.  None should be a governor
who has not a talent for governing.  Now many people have a native
skill for carving out business for many hands; a genius for the
disposition of affairs; and are never happier than when difficult
practical questions, which embarrass other men, are to be solved.
All lies in light before them; they are in their element.  Could any
means be contrived to appoint only these!  There really seems a
progress towards such a state of things, in which this work shall be
done by these natural workmen; and this, not certainly through any
increased discretion shown by the citizens at elections, but by the
gradual contempt into which official government falls, and the
increasing disposition of private adventurers to assume its fallen
functions.  Thus the costly Post Office is likely to go into disuse
before the private transportation-shop of Harnden and his
competitors.  The currency threatens to fall entirely into private
hands.  Justice is continually administered more and more by private
reference, and not by litigation.  We have feudal governments in a
commercial age.  It would be but an easy extension of our commercial
system, to pay a private emperor a fee for services, as we pay an
architect, an engineer, or a lawyer.  If any man has a talent for
righting wrong, for administering difficult affairs, for counselling
poor farmers how to turn their estates to good husbandry, for
combining a hundred private enterprises to a general benefit, let him
in the county-town, or in Court-street, put up his sign-board, Mr.
Smith, _Governor_, Mr. Johnson, _Working king_.

        How can our young men complain of the poverty of things in New
England, and not feel that poverty as a demand on their charity to
make New England rich?  Where is he who seeing a thousand men useless
and unhappy, and making the whole region forlorn by their inaction,
and conscious himself of possessing the faculty they want, does not
hear his call to go and be their king?

        We must have kings, and we must have nobles.  Nature provides
such in every society, -- only let us have the real instead of the
titular.  Let us have our leading and our inspiration from the best.
In every society some men are born to rule, and some to advise.  Let
the powers be well directed, directed by love, and they would
everywhere be greeted with joy and honor.  The chief is the chief all
the world over, only not his cap and his plume.  It is only their
dislike of the pretender, which makes men sometimes unjust to the
accomplished man.  If society were transparent, the noble would
everywhere be gladly received and accredited, and would not be asked
for his day's work, but would be felt as benefit, inasmuch as he was
noble.  That were his duty and stint, -- to keep himself pure and
purifying, the leaven of his nation.  I think I see place and duties
for a nobleman in every society; but it is not to drink wine and ride
in a fine coach, but to guide and adorn life for the multitude by
forethought, by elegant studies, by perseverance, self-devotion, and
the remembrance of the humble old friend, by making his life secretly
beautiful.

        I call upon you, young men, to obey your heart, and be the
nobility of this land.  In every age of the world, there has been a
leading nation, one of a more generous sentiment, whose eminent
citizens were willing to stand for the interests of general justice
and humanity, at the risk of being called, by the men of the moment,
chimerical and fantastic.  Which should be that nation but these
States?  Which should lead that movement, if not New England?  Who
should lead the leaders, but the Young American?  The people, and the
world, is now suffering from the want of religion and honor in its
public mind.  In America, out of doors all seems a market; in doors,
an air-tight stove of conventionalism.  Every body who comes into our
houses savors of these habits; the men, of the market; the women, of
the custom.  I find no expression in our state papers or legislative
debate, in our lyceums or churches, specially in our newspapers, of a
high national feeling, no lofty counsels that rightfully stir the
blood.  I speak of those organs which can be presumed to speak a
popular sense.  They recommend conventional virtues, whatever will
earn and preserve property; always the capitalist; the college, the
church, the hospital, the theatre, the hotel, the road, the ship, of
the capitalist, -- whatever goes to secure, adorn, enlarge these, is
good; what jeopardizes any of these, is damnable.  The `opposition'
papers, so called, are on the same side.  They attack the great
capitalist, but with the aim to make a capitalist of the poor man.
The opposition is against those who have money, from those who wish
to have money.  But who announces to us in journal, or in pulpit, or
in the street, the secret of heroism,

        "Man alone
        Can perform the impossible?"

        I shall not need to go into an enumeration of our national
defects and vices which require this Order of Censors in the state.
I might not set down our most proclaimed offences as the worst.  It
is not often the worst trait that occasions the loudest outcry.  Men
complain of their suffering, and not of the crime.  I fear little
from the bad effect of Repudiation; I do not fear that it will
spread.  Stealing is a suicidal business; you cannot repudiate but
once.  But the bold face and tardy repentance permitted to this local
mischief, reveal a public mind so preoccupied with the love of gain,
that the common sentiment of indignation at fraud does not act with
its natural force.  The more need of a withdrawal from the crowd, and
a resort to the fountain of right, by the brave.  The timidity of our
public opinion, is our disease, or, shall I say, the publicness of
opinion, the absence of private opinion.  Good-nature is plentiful,
but we want justice, with heart of steel, to fight down the proud.
The private mind has the access to the totality of goodness and
truth, that it may be a balance to a corrupt society; and to stand
for the private verdict against popular clamor, is the office of the
noble.  If a humane measure is propounded in behalf of the slave, or
of the Irishman, or the Catholic, or for the succor of the poor, that
sentiment, that project, will have the homage of the hero.  That is
his nobility, his oath of knighthood, to succor the helpless and
oppressed; always to throw himself on the side of weakness, of youth,
of hope, on the liberal, on the expansive side, never on the
defensive, the conserving, the timorous, the lock and bolt system.
More than our good-will we may not be able to give.  We have our own
affairs, our own genius, which chains us to our proper work.  We
cannot give our life to the cause of the debtor, of the slave, or the
pauper, as another is doing; but to one thing we are bound, not to
blaspheme the sentiment and the work of that man, not to throw
stumbling-blocks in the way of the abolitionist, the philanthropist,
as the organs of influence and opinion are swift to do.  It is for us
to confide in the beneficent Supreme Power, and not to rely on our
money, and on the state because it is the guard of money.  At this
moment, the terror of old people and of vicious people, is lest the
Union of these States be destroyed: as if the Union had any other
real basis than the good pleasure of a majority of the citizens to be
united.  But the wise and just man will always feel that he stands on
his own feet; that he imparts strength to the state, not receives
security from it; and that if all went down, he and such as he would
quite easily combine in a new and better constitution.  Every great
and memorable community has consisted of formidable individuals, who,
like the Roman or the Spartan, lent his own spirit to the state and
made it great.  Yet only by the supernatural is a man strong; nothing
is so weak as an egotist.  Nothing is mightier than we, when we are
vehicles of a truth before which the state and the individual are
alike ephemeral.

        Gentlemen, the development of our American internal resources,
the extension to the utmost of the commercial system, and the
appearance of new moral causes which are to modify the state, are
giving an aspect of greatness to the Future, which the imagination
fears to open.  One thing is plain for all men of common sense and
common conscience, that here, here in America, is the home of man.
After all the deductions which are to be made for our pitiful
politics, which stake every gravest national question on the silly
die, whether James or whether Jonathan shall sit in the chair and
hold the purse; after all the deduction is made for our frivolities
and insanities, there still remains an organic simplicity and
liberty, which, when it loses its balance, redresses itself
presently, which offers opportunity to the human mind not known in
any other region.

        It is true, the public mind wants self-respect.  We are full of
vanity, of which the most signal proof is our sensitiveness to
foreign and especially English censure.  One cause of this is our
immense reading, and that reading chiefly confined to the productions
of the English press.  It is also true, that, to imaginative persons
in this country, there is somewhat bare and bald in our short
history, and unsettled wilderness.  They ask, who would live in a new
country, that can live in an old? and it is not strange that our
youths and maidens should burn to see the picturesque extremes of an
antiquated country.  But it is one thing to visit the pyramids, and
another to wish to live there.  Would they like tithes to the clergy,
and sevenths to the government, and horse-guards, and licensed press,
and grief when a child is born, and threatening, starved weavers, and
a pauperism now constituting one-thirteenth of the population?
Instead of the open future expanding here before the eye of every boy
to vastness, would they like the closing in of the future to a narrow
slit of sky, and that fast contracting to be no future?  One thing,
for instance, the beauties of aristocracy, we commend to the study of
the travelling American.  The English, the most conservative people
this side of India, are not sensible of the restraint, but an
American would seriously resent it.  The aristocracy, incorporated by
law and education, degrades life for the unprivileged classes.  It is
a questionable compensation to the embittered feeling of a proud
commoner, the reflection that a fop, who, by the magic of title,
paralyzes his arm, and plucks from him half the graces and rights of
a man, is himself also an aspirant excluded with the same
ruthlessness from higher circles, since there is no end to the wheels
within wheels of this spiral heaven.  Something may be pardoned to
the spirit of loyalty when it becomes fantastic; and something to the
imagination, for the baldest life is symbolic.  Philip II. of Spain
rated his ambassador for neglecting serious affairs in Italy, whilst
he debated some point of honor with the French ambassador; "You have
left a business of importance for a ceremony." The ambassador
replied, "Your majesty's self is but a ceremony." In the East, where
the religious sentiment comes in to the support of the aristocracy,
and in the Romish church also, there is a grain of sweetness in the
tyranny; but in England, the fact seems to me intolerable, what is
commonly affirmed, that such is the transcendent honor accorded to
wealth and birth, that no man of letters, be his eminence what it
may, is received into the best society, except as a lion and a show.
The English have many virtues, many advantages, and the proudest
history of the world; but they need all, and more than all the
resources of the past to indemnify a heroic gentleman in that country
for the mortifications prepared for him by the system of society, and
which seem to impose the alternative to resist or to avoid it.  That
there are mitigations and practical alleviations to this rigor, is
not an excuse for the rule.  Commanding worth, and personal power,
must sit crowned in all companies, nor will extraordinary persons be
slighted or affronted in any company of civilized men.  But the
system is an invasion of the sentiment of justice and the native
rights of men, which, however decorated, must lessen the value of
English citizenship.  It is for Englishmen to consider, not for us;
we only say, let us live in America, too thankful for our want of
feudal institutions.  Our houses and towns are like mosses and
lichens, so slight and new; but youth is a fault of which we shall
daily mend.  This land, too, is as old as the Flood, and wants no
ornament or privilege which nature could bestow.  Here stars, here
woods, here hills, here animals, here men abound, and the vast
tendencies concur of a new order.  If only the men are employed in
conspiring with the designs of the Spirit who led us hither, and is
leading us still, we shall quickly enough advance out of all hearing
of other's censures, out of all regrets of our own, into a new and
more excellent social state than history has recorded.
.
                                      1849

                               REPRESENTATIVE MEN

                             by Ralph Waldo Emerson

                    USES OF GREAT MEN

  IT IS NATURAL to believe in great men. If the companions of our
childhood should turn out to be heroes, and their condition regal it
would not surprise us. All mythology opens with demigods, and the
circumstance is high and poetic; that is, their genius is paramount.
In the legends of the Gautama, the first men ate the earth and found
it deliciously sweet.

  Nature seems to exist for the excellent. The world is upheld by
the veracity of good men: they make the earth wholesome. They who
lived with them found life glad and nutritious. Life is sweet and
tolerable only in our belief in such society; and, actually or
ideally, we manage to live with superiors. We call our children and
our lands by their names. Their names are wrought into the verbs of
language, their works and effigies are in our houses, and every
circumstance of the day recalls an anecdote of them.

  The search after the great man is the dream of youth and the most
serious occupation of manhood. We travel into foreign parts to find
his works,- if possible, to get a glimpse of him. But we are put off
with fortune instead. You say, the English are practical; the
Germans are hospitable; in Valencia the climate is delicious; and in
the hills of the Sacramento there is gold for the gathering. Yes,
but I do not travel to find comfortable, rich and hospitable people,
or clear sky, or ingots that cost too much. But if there were any
magnet that would point to the countries and houses where are the
persons who are intrinsically rich and powerful, I would sell all
and buy it, and put myself on the road today.

  The race goes with us on their credit. The knowledge that in the
city is a man who invented the railroad, raises the credit of all
the citizens. But enormous populations, if they be beggars, are
disgusting, like moving cheese, like hills of ants or of fleas,- the
more, the worse.

  Our religion is the love and cherishing of these patrons. The gods
of fable are the shining moments of great men. We run all our
vessels into one mould. Our colossal theologies of Judaism, Christism,
Buddhism, Mahometism, are the necessary and structural action of the
human mind. The student of history is like a man going into a
warehouse to buy cloths or carpets. He fancies he has a new article.
If he go to the factory, he shall find that his new stuff still
repeats the scrolls and rosettes which are found on the interior walls
of the pyramids of Thebes. Our theism is the purification of the human
mind. Man can paint, or make, or think, nothing but man. He believes
that the great material elements had their origin from his thought.
And our philosophy finds one essence collected or distributed.

  If now we proceed to inquire into the kinds of service we derive
from others, let us be warned of the danger of modern studies, and
begin low enough. We must not contend against love, or deny the
substantial existence of other people. I know not what would happen to
us. We have social strengths. Our affection toward others creates a
sort of vantage or purchase which nothing will supply. I can do that
by another which I cannot do alone. I can say to you what I cannot
first say to myself. Other men are lenses through which we read our
own minds. Each man seeks those of different quality from his own, and
such as are good of their kind; that is, he seeks other men, and the
otherest. The stronger the nature, the more it is reactive. Let us
have the quality pure. A little genius let us leave alone. A main
difference betwixt men is, whether they attend their own affair or
not. Man is that noble endogenous plant which grows, like the palm,
from within outward. His own affair, though impossible to others, he
can open with celerity and in sport. It is easy to sugar to be sweet
and to nitre to be salt. We take a great deal of pains to waylay and
entrap that which of itself will fall into our hands. I count him a
great man who inhabits a higher sphere of thought, into which other
men rise with labor and difficulty; he has but to open his eyes to see
things in a true light and in large relations, whilst they must make
painful corrections and keep a vigilant eye on many sources of
error. His service to us is of like sort. It costs a beautiful
person no exertion to paint her image on our eyes; yet how splendid is
that benefit! It costs no more for a wise soul to convey his quality
to other men. And every one can do his best thing easiest. "Peu de
moyens, beaucoup d'effet." He is great who is what he is from
nature, and who never reminds us of others.

  But he must be related to us, and our life receive from him some
promise of explanation. I cannot tell what I would know; but I have
observed there are persons who, in their character and actions, answer
questions which I have not skill to put. One man answers some question
which none of his contemporaries put, and is isolated. The past and
passing religions and philosophies answer some other questions.
Certain men affect us as rich possibilities, but helpless to
themselves and to their times,- the sport perhaps of some instinct
that rules in the air;- they do not speak to our want. But the great
are near; we know them at sight. They satisfy expectation and fall
into place. What is good is effective, generative; makes for itself
room, food and allies. A sound apple produces seed,- a hybrid does
not. Is a man in his place, he is constructive, fertile, magnetic,
inundating armies with his purpose, which is thus executed. The
river makes its own shores, and each legitimate idea makes its own
channels and welcome,- harvests for food, institutions for expression,
weapons to fight with and disciples to explain it. The true artist has
the planet for his pedestal; the adventurer, after years of strife,
has nothing broader than his own shoes.

  Our common discourse respects two kinds of use or service from
superior men. Direct giving is agreeable to the early belief of men;
direct giving of material or metaphysical aid, as of health, eternal
youth, fine senses, arts of healing, magical power and prophecy. The
boy believes there is a teacher who can sell him wisdom. Churches
believe in imputed merit. But, in strictness, we are not much
cognizant of direct serving. Man is endogenous, and education is his
unfolding. The aid we have from others is mechanical compared with the
discoveries of nature in us. What is thus learned is delightful in the
doing, and the effect remains. Right ethics are central and go from
the soul outward. Gift is contrary to the law of the universe. Serving
others is serving us. I must absolve me to myself. "Mind thy
affair," says the spirit:- "coxcomb, would you meddle with the
skies, or with other people?" Indirect service is left. Men have a
pictorial or representative quality, and serve us in the intellect.
Behmen* and Swedenborg saw that things were representative. Men are
also representative; first, of things, and secondly, of ideas.

  As plants convert the minerals into food for animals, so each man
converts some raw material in nature to human use. The inventors of
fire, electricity, magnetism, iron, lead, glass, linen, silk,
cotton; the makers of tools; the inventor of decimal notation; the
geometer; the engineer; the musician,- severally make an easy way
for all, through unknown and impossible confusions. Each man is by
secret liking connected with some district of nature, whose agent
and interpreter he is; as Linnaeus, of plants; Huber, of bees;
Fries, of lichens; Van Mons, of pears; Dalton, of atomic forms;
Euclid, of lines; Newton, of fluxions.

  A man is a centre for nature, running out threads of relation
through every thing, fluid and solid, material and elemental. The
earth rolls; every clod and stone comes to the meridian: so every
organ, function, acid, crystal, grain of dust, has its relation to the
brain. It waits long, but its turn comes. Each plant has its parasite,
and each created thing its lover and poet. Justice has already been
done to steam, to iron, to wood, to coal, to loadstone, to iodine,
to corn and cotton; but how few materials are yet used by our arts The
mass of creatures and of qualities are still hid and expectant. It
would seem as if each waited, like the enchanted princess in fairy
tales, for a destined human deliverer. Each must be disenchanted and
walk forth to the day in human shape. In the history of discovery, the
ripe and latent truth seems to have fashioned a brain for itself. A
magnet must be made man in some Gilbert*(2), or Swedenborg, or
Oerstad, before the general mind can come to entertain its powers.

  If we limit ourselves to the first advantages, a sober grace adheres
to the mineral and botanic kingdoms, which, in the highest moments,
comes up as the charm of nature,- the glitter of the spar, the
sureness of affinity, the veracity of angles. Light and darkness, heat
and cold, hunger and food, sweet and sour, solid, liquid and gas,
circle us round in a wreath of pleasures, and, by their agreeable
quarrel, beguile the day of life. The eye repeats every day the
first eulogy on things,- "He saw that they were good." We know where
to find them; and these performers are relished all the more, after
a little experience of the pretending races. We are entitled also to
higher advantages. Something is wanting to science until it has been
humanized. The table of logarithms is one thing, and its vital play in
botany, music, optics and architecture, another. There are
advancements to numbers, anatomy, architecture, astronomy, little
suspected at first, when, by union with intellect and will, they
ascend into the life and reappear in conversation, character and
politics.

  But this comes later. We speak now only of our acquaintance with
them in their own sphere and the way in which they seem to fascinate
and draw to them some genius who occupies himself with one thing,
all his life long. The possibility of interpretation lies in the
identity of the observer with the observed. Each material thing has
its celestial side; has its translation, through humanity, into the
spiritual and necessary sphere where it plays a part as indestructible
as any other. And to these, their ends, all things continually ascend.
The gases gather to the solid firmament: the chemic lump arrives at
the plant, and grows; arrives at the quadruped, and walks; arrives
at the man, and thinks. But also the constituency determines the
vote of the representative. He is not only representative, but
participant. Like can only be known by like. The reason why he knows
about them is that he is of them; he has just come out of nature, or
from being a part of that thing. Animated chlorine knows of
chlorine, and incarnate zinc, of zinc. Their quality makes his career;
and he can variously publish their virtues, because they compose
him. Man, made of the dust of the world, does not forget his origin;
and all that is yet inanimate will one day speak and reason.
Unpublished nature will have its whole secret told. Shall we say
that quartz mountains will pulverize into innumerable Werners, Von
Buchs and Beaumonts, and the laboratory of the atmosphere holds in
solution I know not what Berzeliuses and Davys?

  Thus we sit by the fire and take hold on the poles of the earth.
This quasi omnipresence supplies the imbecility of our condition. In
one of those celestial days when heaven and earth meet and adorn
each other, it seems a poverty that we can only spend it once: we wish
for a thousand heads, a thousand bodies, that we might celebrate its
immense beauty in many ways and places. Is this fancy? Well, in good
faith, we are multiplied by our proxies. How easily we adopt their
labors! Every ship that comes to America got its chart from
Columbus. Every novel is a debtor to Homer. Every carpenter who shaves
with a fore-plane borrows the genius of a forgotten inventor. Life
is girt all round with a zodiac of sciences, the contributions of
men who have perished to add their point of light to our sky.
Engineer, broker, jurist, physician, moralist, theologian, and every
man, inasmuch as he has any science,- is a definer and map-maker of
the latitudes and longitudes of our condition. These roadmakers on
every hand enrich us. We must extend the area of life and multiply our
relations. We are as much gainers by finding a new property in the old
earth as by acquiring a new planet.

  We are too passive in the reception of these material or
semi-material aids. We must not be sacks and stomachs. To ascend one
step,- we are better served through our sympathy. Activity is
contagious. Looking where others look, and conversing with the same
things, we catch the charm which lured them. Napoleon said, "You
must not fight too often with one enemy, or you will teach him all
your art of war." Talk much with any man of vigorous mind, and we
acquire very fast the habit of looking at things in the same light,
and on each occurrence we anticipate his thought.

  Men are helpful through the intellect and the affections. Other help
I find a false appearance. If you affect to give me bread and fire,
I perceive that I pay for it the full price, and at last it leaves
me as it found me, neither better nor worse: but all mental and
moral force is a positive good. It goes out from you, whether you will
or not, and profits me whom you never thought of. I cannot even hear
of personal vigor of any kind, great power of performance, without
fresh resolution. We are emulous of all that man can do. Cecil's
saying of Sir Walter Raleigh, "I know that he can toil terribly," is
an electric touch. So are Clarendon's portraits,- of Hampden, "who was
of an industry and vigilance not to be tired out or wearied by the
most laborious, and of parts not to be imposed on by the most subtle
and sharp, and of a personal courage equal to his best parts";- of
Falkland, "who was so severe an adorer of truth, that he could as
easily have given himself leave to steal, as to dissemble." We
cannot read Plutarch without a tingling of the blood; and I accept the
saying of the Chinese Mencius: "A sage is the instructor of a
hundred ages. When the manners of Loo are heard of, the stupid
become intelligent, and the wavering, determined."

  This is the moral of biography; yet it is hard for departed men to
touch the quick like our own companions, whose names may not last as
long. What is he whom I never think of? Whilst in every solitude are
those who succor our genius and stimulate us in wonderful manners.
There is a power in love to divine another's destiny better than
that other can, and, by heroic encouragements, hold him to his task.
What has friendship so signal as its sublime attraction to whatever
virtue is in us? We will never more think cheaply of ourselves, or
of life. We are piqued to some purpose, and the industry of the
diggers on the railroad will not again shame us.

  Under this head too falls that homage, very pure as I think, which
all ranks pay to the hero of the day, from Coriolanus and Gracchus
down to Pitt, Lafayette, Wellington, Webster, Lamartine. Hear the
shouts in the street! The people cannot see him enough. They delight
in a man. Here is a head and a trunk! What a front! what eyes!
Atlantean shoulders, and the whole carriage heroic, with equal
inward force to guide the great machine! This pleasure of full
expression to that which, in their private experience, is usually
cramped and obstructed, runs also much higher, and is the secret of
the reader's joy in literary genius. Nothing is kept back. There is
fire enough to fuse the mountain of ore. Shakespeare's principal merit
may be conveyed in saying that he of all men best understands the
English language, and can say what he will. Yet these unchoked
channels and floodgates of expression are only health or fortunate
constitution. Shakespeare's name suggests other and purely
intellectual benefits.

  Senates and sovereigns have no compliment, with their medals, swords
and armorial coats, like the addressing to a human being thoughts
out of a certain height, and presupposing his intelligence. This
honor, which is possible in personal intercourse scarcely twice in a
lifetime, genius perpetually pays; contented if now and then in a
century the proffer is accepted. The indicators of the values of
matter are degraded to a sort of cooks and confectioners, on the
appearance of the indicators of ideas. Genius is the naturalist or
geographer of the supersensible regions, and draws their map; and,
by acquainting us with new fields of activity, cools our affection for
the old. These are at once accepted as the reality, of which the world
we have conversed with is the show.

  We go to the gymnasium and the swimming-school to see the power
and beauty of the body; there is the like pleasure and a higher
benefit from witnessing intellectual feats of all kinds; as feats of
memory, of mathematical combination, great power of abstraction, the
transmutings of the imagination, even versatility and
concentration,- as these acts expose the invisible organs and
members of the mind, which respond, member for member, to the parts of
the body. For we thus enter a new gymnasium, and learn to choose men
by their truest marks, taught, with Plato, "to choose those who can,
without aid from the eyes or any other sense, proceed to truth and
to being." Foremost among these activities are the summersaults,
spells and resurrections wrought by the imagination. When this
wakes, a man seems to multiply ten times or a thousand times his
force. It opens the delicious sense of indeterminate size and inspires
an audacious mental habit. We are as elastic as the gas of
gunpowder, and a sentence in a book, or a word dropped in
conversation, sets free our fancy, and instantly our heads are
bathed with galaxies, and our feet tread the floor of the Pit. And
this benefit is real because we are entitled to these enlargements,
and once having passed the bounds shall never again be quite the
miserable pedants we were.

  The high functions of the intellect are so allied that some
imaginative power usually appears in all eminent minds, even in
arithmeticians of the first class, but especially in meditative men of
an intuitive habit of thought. This class serve us, so that they
have the perception of identity and the perception of reaction. The
eyes of Plato, Shakespeare, Swedenborg, Goethe, never shut on either
of these laws. The perception of these laws is a kind of metre of
the mind. Little minds are little through failure to see them.

  Even these feasts have their surfeit. Our delight in reason
degenerates into idolatry of the herald. Especially when a mind of
powerful method has instructed men, we find the examples of
oppression. The dominion of Aristotle, the Ptolemaic astronomy, the
credit of Luther, of Bacon, of Locke;- in religion the history of
hierarchies, of saints, and the sects which have taken the name of
each founder, are in point. Alas! every man is such a victim. The
imbecility of men is always inviting the impudence of power. It is the
delight of vulgar talent to dazzle and to blind the beholder. But true
genius seeks to defend us from itself. True genius will not
impoverish, but will liberate, and add new senses. If a wise man
should appear in our village he would create, in those who conversed
with him, a new consciousness of wealth, by opening their eyes to
unobserved advantages; he would establish a sense of immovable
equality, calm us with assurances that we could not be cheated; as
every one would discern the checks and guaranties of condition. The
rich would see their mistakes and poverty, the poor their escapes
and their resources.

  But nature brings all this about in due time. Rotation is her
remedy. The soul is impatient of masters and eager for change.
Housekeepers say of a domestic who has been valuable, "She had lived
with me long enough." We are tendencies, or rather, symptoms, and none
of us complete. We touch and go, and sip the foam of many lives.
Rotation is the law of nature. When nature removes a great man, people
explore the horizon for a successor; but none comes, and none will.
His class is extinguished with him. In some other and quite
different field the next man will appear; not Jefferson, not Franklin,
but now a great salesman, then a road-contractor, then a student of
fishes, then a buffalo-hunting explorer, or a semi-savage Western
general. Thus we make a stand against our rougher masters; but against
the best there is a finer remedy. The power which they communicate
is not theirs. When we are exalted by ideas, we do not owe this to
Plato, but to the idea, to which also Plato was debtor.

  I must not forget that we have a special debt to a single class.
Life is a scale of degrees. Between rank and rank of our great men are
wide intervals. Mankind have in all ages attached themselves to a
few persons who either by the quality of that idea they embodied or by
the largeness of their reception were entitled to the position of
leaders and law-givers. These teach us the qualities of primary
nature,- admit us to the constitution of things. We swim, day by
day, on a river of delusions and are effectually amused with houses
and towns in the air, of which the men about us are dupes. But life is
a sincerity. In lucid intervals we say, "Let there be an entrance
opened for me into realities;*(3) I have worn the fool's cap too
long." We will know the meaning of our economies and politics. Give us
the cipher, and if persons and things are scores of a celestial music,
let us read off the strains. We have been cheated of our reason; yet
there have been sane men, who enjoyed a rich and related existence.
What they know, they know for us. With each new mind, a new secret
of nature transpires; nor can the Bible be closed until the last great
man is born. These men correct the delirium of the animal spirits,
make us considerate and engage us to new aims and powers. The
veneration of mankind selects these for the highest place. Witness the
multitude of statues, pictures and memorials which recall their genius
in every city, village, house and ship:-

        "Ever their phantoms arise before us,

         Our loftier brothers, but one in blood;

         At bed and table they lord it o'er us

         With looks of beauty and words of good."

  How to illustrate the distinctive benefit of ideas, the service
rendered by those who introduce moral truths into the general mind?- I
am plagued, in all my living, with a perpetual tariff of prices. If
I work in my garden and prune an apple-tree, I am well enough
entertained, and could continue indefinitely in the like occupation.
But it comes to mind that a day is gone, and I have got this
precious nothing done. I go to Boston or New York and run up and
down on my affairs: they are sped, but so is the day. I am vexed by
the recollection of this price I have paid for a trifling advantage. I
remember the peau d'ane on which whoso sat should have his desire, but
a piece of the skin was gone for every wish. I go to a convention of
philanthropists. Do what I can, I cannot keep my eyes off the clock.
But if there should appear in the company some gentle soul who knows
little of persons or parties, of Carolina or Cuba, but who announces a
law that disposes these particulars, and so certifies me of the equity
which checkmates every false player, bankrupts every self-seeker,
and apprises me of my independence on any conditions of country, or
time, or human body,- that man liberates me; I forget the clock. I
pass out of the sore relation to persons. I am healed of my hurts. I
am made immortal by apprehending my possession of incorruptible goods.
Here is great competition of rich and poor. We live in a market, where
is only so much wheat, or wool, or land; and if I have so much more,
every other must have so much less. I seem to have no good without
breach of good manners. Nobody is glad in the gladness of another, and
our system is one of war, of an injurious superiority. Every child
of the Saxon race is educated to wish to be first. It is our system;
and a man comes to measure his greatness by the regrets, envies and
hatreds of his competitors. But in these new fields there is room:
here are no self-esteems, no exclusions.

  I admire great men of all classes, those who stand for facts, and
for thoughts; I like rough and smooth, "Scourges of God," and
"Darlings of the human race." I like the first Caesar; and Charles
V, of Spain; and Charles XII, of Sweden; Richard Plantagenet; and
Bonaparte, in France. I applaud a sufficient man, an officer equal
to his office; captains, ministers, senators. I like a master standing
firm on legs of iron, wellborn, rich, handsome, eloquent, loaded
with advantages, drawing all men by fascination into tributaries and
supporters of his power. Sword and staff, or talents sword-like or
staff-like, carry on the work of the world. But I find him greater
when he can abolish himself and all heroes, by letting in this element
of reason, irrespective of persons, this subtilizer and irresistible
upward force, into our thought, destroying individualism; the power so
great that the potentate is nothing. Then he is a monarch who gives
a constitution to his people; a pontiff who preaches the equality of
souls and releases his servants from their barbarous homages; an
emperor who can spare his empire.

  But I intended to specify, with a little minuteness, two or three
points of service. Nature never spares the opium or nepenthe, but
wherever she mars her creature with some deformity or defect, lays her
poppies plentifully on the bruise, and the sufferer goes joyfully
through life, ignorant of the ruin and incapable of seeing it,
though all the world point their finger at it every day. The worthless
and offensive members of society, whose existence is a social pest,
invariably think themselves the most ill-used people alive, and
never get over their astonishment at the ingratitude and selfishness
of their contemporaries. Our globe discovers its hidden virtues, not
only in heroes and archangels, but in gossips and nurses. Is it not
a rare contrivance that lodged the due inertia in every creature,
the conserving, resisting energy, the anger at being waked or changed?
Altogether independent of the intellectual force in each is the
pride of opinion, the security that we are right. Not the feeblest
grandame, not a mowing idiot, but uses what spark of perception and
faculty is left, to chuckle and triumph in his or her opinion over the
absurdities of all the rest. Difference from me is the measure of
absurdity. Not one has a misgiving of being wrong. Was it not a bright
thought that made things cohere with this bitumen, fastest of cements?
But, in the midst of this chuckle of self-gratulation, some figure
goes by which Thersites too can love and admire. This is he that
should marshal us the way we were going. There is no end to his aid.
Without Plato we should almost lose our faith in the possibility of
a reasonable book. We seem to want but one, but we want one. We love
to associate with heroic persons, since our receptivity is
unlimited; and, with the great, our thoughts and manners easily become
great. We are all wise in capacity, though so few in energy. There
needs but one wise man in a company and all are wise, so rapid is
the contagion.

  Great men are thus a collyrium to clear our eyes from egotism and
enable us to see other people and their works. But there are vices and
follies incident to whole populations and ages. Men resemble their
contemporaries even more than their progenitors. It is observed in old
couples, or in persons who have been housemates for a course of years,
that they grow like, and if they should live long enough we should not
be able to know them apart. Nature abhors these complaisances which
threaten to melt the world into a lump, and hastens to break up such
maudlin agglutinations. The like assimilation goes on between men of
one town, of one sect, of one political party; and the ideas of the
time are in the air, and infect all who breathe it. Viewed from any
high point, this city of New York, yonder city of London, the
Western civilization, would seem a bundle of insanities. We keep
each other in countenance and exasperate by emulation the frenzy of
the time. The shield against the stingings of conscience is the
universal practice, or our contemporaries. Again, it is very easy to
be as wise and good as your companions. We learn of our contemporaries
what they know without effort, and almost through the pores of the
skin. We catch it by sympathy, or as a wife arrives at the
intellectual and moral elevations of her husband. But we stop where
they stop. Very hardly can we take another step. The great, or such as
hold of nature and transcend fashions by their fidelity to universal
ideas, are saviors from these federal errors,*(4) and defend us from
our contemporaries. They are the exceptions which we want, where all
grows like. A foreign greatness is the antidote for cabalism.

  Thus we feed on genius, and refresh ourselves from too much
conversation with our mates, and exult in the depth of nature in
that direction in which he leads us. What indemnification is one great
man for populations of pigmies! Every mother wishes one son a
genius, though all the rest should be mediocre. But a new danger
appears in the excess of influence of the great man. His attractions
warp us from our place. We have become underlings and intellectual
suicides. Ah! yonder in the horizon is our help;- other great men, new
qualities, counterweights and checks on each other. We cloy of the
honey of each peculiar greatness. Every hero becomes a bore at last.
Perhaps Voltaire was not bad-hearted, yet he said of the good Jesus,
even, "I pray you, let me never hear that man's name again." They
cry up the virtues of George Washington,- "Damn George Washington!" is
the poor Jacobin's whole speech and confutation. But it is human
nature's indispensable defence. The centripetence augments the
centrifugence. We balance one man with his opposite, and the health of
the state depends on the see-saw.

  There is however a speedy limit to the use of heroes. Every genius
is defended from approach by quantities of unavailableness. They are
very attractive, and seem at a distance our own: but we are hindered
on all sides from approach. The more we are drawn, the more we are
repelled. There is something not solid in the good that is done for
us. The best discovery the discoverer makes for himself. It has
something unreal for his companion until he too has substantiated
it. It seems as if the Deity dressed each soul which he sends into
nature in certain virtues and powers not communicable to other men,
and sending it to perform one more turn through the circle of
beings, wrote, "Not transferable" and "Good for this trip only," on
these garments of the soul. There is somewhat deceptive about the
intercourse of minds. The boundaries are invisible, but they are never
crossed. There is such good will to impart, and such good will to
receive, that each threatens to become the other; but the law of
individuality collects its secret strength: you are you, and I am I,
and so we remain.

  For nature wishes every thing to remain itself; and whilst every
individual strives to grow and exclude and to exclude and grow, to the
extremities of the universe, and to impose the law of its being on
every other creature, Nature steadily aims to protect each against
every other. Each is self-defended. Nothing is more marked than the
power by which individuals are guarded from individuals, in a world
where every benefactor becomes so easily a malefactor only by
continuation of his activity into places where it is not due; where
children seem so much at the mercy of their foolish parents, and where
almost all men are too social and interfering. We rightly speak of the
guardian angels of children. How superior in their security from
infusions of evil persons, from vulgarity and second thought! They
shed their own abundant beauty on the objects they behold. Therefore
they are not at the mercy of such poor educators as we adults. If we
huff and chide them they soon come not to mind it and get a
self-reliance; and if we indulge them to folly, they learn the
limitation elsewhere.

  We need not fear excessive influence. A more generous trust is
permitted. Serve the great. Stick at no humiliation. Grudge no
office thou canst render. Be the limb of their body, the breath of
their mouth. Compromise thy egotism. Who cares for that, so thou
gain aught wider and nobler? Never mind the taunt of Boswellism: the
devotion may easily be greater than the wretched pride which is
guarding its own skirts. Be another: not thyself, but a Platonist; not
a soul, but a Christian; not a naturalist, but a Cartesian; not a
poet, but a Shakespearean. In vain, the wheels of tendency will not
stop, nor will all the forces of inertia, fear, or of love itself hold
thee there. On, and forever onward! The microscope observes a monad or
wheel-insect among the infusories circulating in water. Presently a
dot appears on the animal, which enlarges to a slit, and it becomes
two perfect animals. The ever-proceeding detachment appears not less
in all thought and in society. Children think they cannot live without
their parents. But, long before they are aware of it, the black dot
has appeared and the detachment taken place. Any accident will now
reveal to them their independence.

  But great men:- the word is injurious. Is there caste? Is there
fate? What becomes of the promise to virtue? The thoughtful youth
laments the superfoetation of nature. "Generous and handsome," he
says, "is your hero; but look at yonder poor Paddy, whose country is
his wheelbarrow; look at his whole nation of Paddies." Why are the
masses, from the dawn of history down, food for knives and powder? The
idea dignifies a few leaders, who have sentiment, opinion, love,
self-devotion; and they make war and death sacred;- but what for the
wretches whom they hire and kill? The cheapness of man is every
day's tragedy. It is as real a loss that others should be as low as
that we should be low; for we must have society.

  Is it a reply to these suggestions to say, Society is a Pestalozzian
school: all are teachers and pupils in turn? We are equally served
by receiving and by imparting. Men who know the same things are not
long the best company for each other. But bring to each an intelligent
person of another experience, and it is as if you let off water from a
lake by cutting a lower basin. It seems a mechanical advantage, and
great benefit it is to each speaker, as he can now paint out his
thought to himself. We pass very fast, in our personal moods, from
dignity to dependence. And if any appear never to assume the chair,
but always to stand and serve, it is because we do not see the company
in a sufficiently long period for the whole rotation of parts to
come about. As to what we call the masses, and common men,- there
are no common men. All men are at last of a size; and true art is only
possible on the conviction that every talent has its apotheosis
somewhere. Fair play and an open field and freshest laurels to all who
have won them! But heaven reserves an equal scope for every creature.
Each is uneasy until he has produced his private ray unto the concave
sphere and beheld his talent also in its last nobility and exaltation.

  The heroes of the hour are relatively great; of a faster growth;
or they are such in whom, at the moment of success, a quality is
ripe which is then in request. Other days will demand other qualities.
Some rays escape the common observer, and want a finely adapted eye.
Ask the great man if there be none greater. His companions are; and
not the less great but the more that society cannot see them. Nature
never sends a great man into the planet without confiding the secret
to another soul.

  One gracious fact emerges from these studies,- that there is true
ascension in our love. The reputations of the nineteenth century
will one day be quoted to prove its barbarism. The genius of
humanity is the real subject whose biography is written in our annals.
We must infer much, and supply many chasms in the record. The
history of the universe is symptomatic, and life is mnemonical. No
man, in all the procession of famous men, is reason or illumination or
that essence we were looking for; but is an exhibition, in some
quarter, of new possibilities. Could we one day complete the immense
figure which these flagrant*(5) points compose! The study of many
individuals leads us to an elemental region wherein the individual
is lost, or wherein all touch by their summits. Thought and feeling
that break out there cannot be impounded by any fence of
personality. This is the key to the power of the greatest men,-
their spirit diffuses itself. A new quality of mind travels by night
and by day, in concentric circles from its origin, and publishes
itself by unknown methods: the union of all minds appears intimate;
what gets admission to one, cannot be kept out of any other; the
smallest acquisition of truth or of energy, in any quarter, is so much
good to the commonwealth of souls. If the disparities of talent and
position vanish when the individuals are seen in the duration which is
necessary to complete the career of each, even more swiftly the
seeming injustice disappears when we ascend to the central identity of
all the individuals, and know that they are made of the substance
which ordaineth and doeth.

  The genius of humanity is the right point of view of history. The
qualities abide; the men who exhibit them have now more, now less, and
pass away; the qualities remain on another brow. No experience is more
familiar. Once you saw phoenixes: they are gone; the world is not
therefore disenchanted. The vessels on which you read sacred emblems
turn out to be common pottery; but the sense of the pictures is
sacred, and you may still read them transferred to the walls of the
world. For a time our teachers serve us personally, as metres or
milestones of progress. Once they were angels of knowledge and their
figures touched the sky. Then we drew near, saw their means, culture
and limits; and they yielded their place to other geniuses. Happy,
if a few names remain so high that we have not been able to read
them nearer, and age and comparison have not robbed them of a ray. But
at last we shall cease to look in men for completeness, and shall
content ourselves with their social and delegated quality. All that
respects the individual is temporary and prospective, like the
individual himself, who is ascending out of his limits into a catholic
existence. We have never come at the true and best benefit of any
genius so long as we believe him an original force. In the moment when
he ceases to help us as a cause, he begins to help us more as an
effect. Then he appears as an exponent of a vaster mind and will.
The opaque self becomes transparent with the light of the First Cause.

  Yet, within the limits of human education and agency, we may say
great men exist that there may be greater men. The destiny of
organized nature is amelioration, and who can tell its limits? It is
for man to tame the chaos; on every side, whilst he lives, to
scatter the seeds of science and of song, that climate, corn,
animals, men, may be milder, and the germs of love and benefit may be
multiplied.*(6)
PLATO

                         PLATO

                   or, The Philosopher

  AMONG secular*(7) books, Plato only is entitled to Omar's*(8)
fanatical compliment to the Koran, when he said, "Burn the
libraries; for their value is in this book." These sentences contain
the culture of nations; these are the corner-stone of schools; these
are the fountain-head of literatures. A discipline it is in logic,
arithmetic, taste, symmetry, poetry, language, rhetoric, ontology,
morals or practical wisdom. There was never such range of speculation.
Out of Plato come all things that are still written and debated
among men of thought. Great havoc makes he among our originalities. We
have reached the mountain from which all these drift boulders were
detached. The Bible of the learned for twenty-two hundred years, every
brisk young man who says in succession fine things to each reluctant
generation,- Boethius, Rabelais, Erasmus, Bruno, Locke, Rousseau,
Alfieri, Coleridge,- is some reader of Plato, translating into the
vernacular, wittily, his good things. Even the men of grander
proportion suffer some deduction from the misfortune (shall I say?) of
coming after this exhausting generalizer. St. Augustine, Copernicus,
Newton, Behmen, Swedenborg, Goethe, are likewise his debtors and
must say after him. For it is fair to credit the broadest
generalizer with all the particulars deducible from his thesis.

  Plato is philosophy, and philosophy, Plato,- at once the glory and
the shame of mankind, since neither Saxon nor Roman have availed to
add any idea to his categories. No wife, no children had he, and the
thinkers of all civilized nations are his posterity and are tinged
with his mind. How many great men Nature is incessantly sending up out
of night, to be his men,- Platonists! the Alexandrians, a
constellation of genius; the Elizabethans, not less; Sir Thomas
More, Henry More, John Hales, John Smith, Lord Bacon, Jeremy Taylor,
Ralph Cudworth, Sydenham, Thomas Taylor; Marcilius Ficinus and Picus
Mirandola. Calvinism is in his Phaedo: Christianity is in it.
Mahometanism draws all its philosophy, in its hand-book of morals, the
Akhlak-y-Jalaly, from him. Mysticism finds in Plato all its texts.
This citizen of a town in Greece is no villager nor patriot. An
Englishman reads and says, "how English!" a German- "how Teutonic!" an
Italian- "how Roman and how Greek!" As they say that Helen of Argos
had that universal beauty that every body felt related to her, so
Plato seems to a reader in New England an American genius. His broad
humanity transcends all sectional lines.

  This range of Plato instructs us what to think of the vexed question
concerning his reputed works,- what are genuine, what spurious. It
is singular that wherever we find a man higher by a whole head than
any of his contemporaries, it is sure to come into doubt what are
his real works. Thus Homer, Plato, Raffaelle, Shakespeare. For these
men magnetize their contemporaries, so that their companions can do
for them what they can never do for themselves; and the great man does
thus live in several bodies, and write, or paint or act, by many
hands; and after some time it is not easy to say what is the authentic
work of the master and what is only of his school.

  Plato, too, like every great man, consumed his own times. What is
a great man but one of great affinities, who takes up into himself all
arts, sciences, all knowables, as his food? He can spare nothing; he
can dispose of every thing. What is not good for virtue, is good for
knowledge. Hence his contemporaries tax him with plagiarism. But the
inventor only knows how to borrow; and society is glad to forget the
innumerable laborers who ministered to this architect, and reserves
all its gratitude for him. When we are praising Plato, it seems we are
praising quotations from Solon and Sophron and Philolaus. Be it so.
Every book is a quotation; and every house is a quotation out of all
forests and mines and stone quarries; and every man is a quotation
from all his ancestors. And this grasping inventor puts all nations
under contribution.

  Plato absorbed the learning of his times,- Philolaus, Timaeus,
Heraclitus, Parmenides, and what else; then his master, Socrates;
and finding himself still capable of a larger synthesis,- beyond all
example then or since,- he traveled into Italy, to gain what
Pythagoras had for him; then into Egypt, and perhaps still farther
East, to import the other element, which Europe wanted, into the
European mind. This breadth entitles him to stand as the
representative of philosophy. He says, in the Republic, "Such a genius
as philosophers must of necessity have, is wont but seldom in all
its parts to meet in one man, but its different parts generally spring
up in different persons." Every man who would do anything well, must
come to it from a higher ground. A philosopher must be more than a
philosopher. Plato is clothed with the powers of a poet, stands upon
the highest place of the poet, and (though I doubt he wanted the
decisive gift of lyric expression), mainly is not a poet because he
chose to use the poetic gift to an ulterior purpose.

  Great geniuses have the shortest biographies. Their cousins can tell
you nothing about them. They lived in their writings, and so their
house and street life was trivial and commonplace. If you would know
their tastes and complexions, the most admiring of their readers
most resembles them. Plato especially has no external biography. If he
had lover, wife, or children, we hear nothing of them. He ground
them all into paint. As a good chimney burns its smoke, so a
philosopher converts the value of all his fortunes into his
intellectual performances.

  He was born 427 A.C., about the time of the death of Pericles; was
of patrician connection in his times and city, and is said to have had
an early inclination for war, but, in his twentieth year, meeting with
Socrates, was easily dissuaded from this pursuit and remained for
ten years his scholar, until the death of Socrates. He then went to
Megara, accepted the invitations of Dion and of Dionysius to the court
of Sicily, and went thither three times, though very capriciously
treated. He traveled into Italy; then into Egypt, where he stayed a
long time; some say three,- some say thirteen years. It is said he
went farther, into Babylonia: this is uncertain. Returning to
Athens, he gave lessons in the Academy to those whom his fame drew
thither; and died, as we have received it, in the act of writing, at
eighty-one years.

  But the biography of Plato is interior. We are to account for the
supreme elevation of this man in the intellectual history of our
race,- how it happens that in proportion to the culture of men they
become his scholars; that, as our Jewish Bible has implanted itself in
the tabletalk and household life of every man and woman in the
European and American nations, so the writings of Plato have
preoccupied every school of learning, every lover of thought, every
church, every poet,- making it impossible to think, on certain levels,
except through him. He stands between the truth and every man's
mind, and has almost impressed language and the primary forms of
thought with his name and seal. I am struck, in reading him, with
the extreme modernness of his style and spirit. Here is the germ of
that Europe we know so well, in its long history of arts and arms;
here are all its traits, already discernible in the mind of Plato,-
and in none before him. It has spread itself since into a hundred
histories, but has added no new element. This perpetual modernness
is the measure of merit in every work of art; since the author of it
was not misled by any thing short-lived or local, but abode by real
and abiding traits. How Plato came thus to be Europe, and
philosophy, and almost literature, is the problem for us to solve.

  This could not have happened without a sound, sincere and catholic
man, able to honor, at the same time, the ideal, or laws of the
mind, and fate, or the order of nature. The first period of a
nation, as of an individual, is the period of unconscious strength.
Children cry, scream and stamp with fury, unable to express their
desires. As soon as they can speak and tell their want and the
reason of it, they become gentle. In adult life, whilst the
perceptions are obtuse, men and women talk vehemently and
superlatively, blunder and quarrel: their manners are full of
desperation; their speech is full of oaths. As soon as, with
culture, things have cleared up a little, and they see them no
longer in lumps and masses but accurately distributed, they desist
from that weak vehemence and explain their meaning in detail. If the
tongue had not been framed for articulation, man would still be a
beast in the forest. The same weakness and want, on a higher plane,
occurs daily in the education of ardent young men and women. "Ah!
you don't understand me; I have never met with any one who comprehends
me": and they sigh and weep, write verses and walk alone,- fault of
power to express their precise meaning. In a month or two, through the
favor of their good genius, they meet some one so related as to assist
their volcanic estate, and, good communication being once established,
they are thenceforward good citizens. It is ever thus. The progress is
to accuracy, to skill, to truth, from blind force.

  There is a moment in the history of every nation, when, proceeding
out of this brute youth, the perceptive powers reach their ripeness
and have not yet become microscopic: so that man, at that instant,
extends across the entire scale, and, with his feet still planted on
the immense forces of night, converses by his eyes and brain with
solar and stellar creation. That is the moment of adult health, the
culmination of power.

  Such is the history of Europe, in all points; and such in
philosophy. Its early records, almost perished, are of the
immigrations from Asia, bringing with them the dreams of barbarians; a
confusion of crude notions of morals and of natural philosophy,
gradually subsiding through the partial insight of single teachers.

  Before Pericles came the Seven Wise Masters, and we have the
beginnings of geometry, metaphysics and ethics: then the partialists,-
deducing the origin of things from flux or water, or from air, or from
fire, or from mind. All mix with these causes mythologic pictures.
At last comes Plato, the distributor, who needs no barbaric point,
or tattoo, or whooping; for he can define. He leaves with Asia the
vast and superlative; he is the arrival of accuracy and
intelligence. "He shall be as a god to me, who can rightly divide
and define."

  This defining is philosophy. Philosophy is the account which the
human mind gives to itself of the constitution of the world. Two
cardinal facts lie forever at the base; the one, and the two: 1.
Unity, or Identity; and, 2. Variety. We unite all things by perceiving
the law which pervades them; by perceiving the superficial differences
and the profound resemblances. But every mental act,- this very
perception of identity or oneness, recognizes the difference of
things. Oneness and otherness. It is impossible to speak or to think
without embracing both.

  The mind is urged to ask for one cause of many effects; then for the
cause of that; and again the cause, diving still into the profound:
self-assured that it shall arrive at an absolute and sufficient
one,- a one that shall be all. "In the midst of the sun is the
light, in the midst of the light is truth, and in the midst of truth
is the imperishable being," say the Vedas. All philosophy, of East and
West, has the same centripetence. Urged by an opposite necessity,
the mind returns from the one to that which is not one, but other or
many; from cause to effect; and affirms the necessary existence of
variety, the self-existence of both, as each is involved in the other.
These strictly-blended elements it is the problem of thought to
separate and to reconcile. Their existence is mutually contradictory
and exclusive; and each so fast slides into the other that we can
never say what is one, and what it is not. The Proteus is as nimble in
the highest as in the lowest grounds; when we contemplate the one, the
true, the good,- as in the surfaces and extremities of matter.

  In all nations there are minds which incline to dwell in the
conception of the fundamental Unity. The raptures of prayer and
ecstasy of devotion lose all being in one Being. This tendency finds
its highest expression in the religious writings of the East, and
chiefly in the Indian Scriptures, in the Vedas, the Bhagavat Geeta,
and the Vishnu Purana. Those writings contain little else than this
idea, and they rise to pure and sublime strains in celebrating it.

  The Same, the Same: friend and foe are of one stuff; the
ploughman, the plough and the furrow are of one stuff; and the stuff
is such and so much that the variations of form are unimportant.
"You are fit" (says the supreme Krishna to a sage) "to apprehend
that you are not distinct from me. That which I am, thou art, and that
also is this world, with its gods and heroes and mankind. Men
contemplate distinctions, because they are stupefied with
ignorance." "The words I and mine constitute ignorance. What is the
great end of all, you shall now learn from me. It is soul,- one in all
bodies, pervading, uniform, perfect, preeminent over nature, exempt
from birth, growth and decay, omnipresent, made up of true
knowledge, independent, unconnected with unrealities, with name,
species and the rest, in time past, present and to come. The knowledge
that this spirit, which is essentially one, is in one's own and in all
other bodies, is the wisdom of one who knows the unity of things. As
one diffusive air, passing through the perforations of a flute, is
distinguished as the notes of a scale, so the nature of the Great
Spirit is single, though its forms be manifold, arising from the
consequences of acts. When the difference of the investing form, as
that of god or the rest, is destroyed, there is no distinction."
"The whole world is but a manifestation of Vishnu, who is identical
with all things, and is to be regarded by the wise as not differing
from, but as the same as themselves. I neither am going nor coming;
nor is my dwelling in any one place; nor art thou, thou; nor are
others, others; nor am I, I." As if he had said, "All is for the soul,
and the soul is Vishnu; and animals and stars are transient paintings;
and light is whitewash; and durations are deceptive; and form is
imprisonment; and heaven itself a decoy." That which the soul seeks is
resolution into being above form, out of Tartarus and out of
heaven,- liberation from nature.

  If speculation tends thus to a terrific unity, in which all things
are absorbed, action tends directly backwards to diversity. The
first is the course or gravitation of mind; the second is the power of
nature. Nature is the manifold. The unity absorbs, and melts or
reduces. Nature opens and creates. These two principles reappear and
interpenetrate all things, all thought; the one, the many. One is
being; the other, intellect: one is necessity; the other, freedom:
one, rest; the other, motion: one, power; the other, distribution:
one, strength; the other, pleasure: one, consciousness; the other,
definition: one, genius; the other, talent: one, earnestness; the
other, knowledge: one, possession; the other, trade: one, caste; the
other, culture: one, king; the other, democracy: and, if we dare carry
these generalizations a step higher, and name the last tendency of
both, we might say, that the end of the one is escape from
organization,- pure science; and the end of the other is the highest
instrumentality, or use of means, or executive deity.

  Each student adheres, by temperament and by habit, to the first or
to the second of these gods of the mind. By religion, he tends to
unity; by intellect, or by the senses, to the many. A too rapid
unification, and an excessive appliance to parts and particulars,
are the twin dangers of speculation.

  To this partiality the history of nations corresponded. The
country of unity, of immovable institutions, the seat of a
philosophy delighting in abstractions, of men faithful in doctrine and
in practice to the idea of a deaf, unimplorable, immense fate, is
Asia; and it realizes this faith in the social institution of caste.
On the other side, the genius of Europe is active and creative: it
resists caste by culture; its philosophy was a discipline; it is a
land of arts, inventions, trade, freedom. If the East loved
infinity, the West delighted in boundaries.

  European civility is the triumph of talent, the extension of system,
the sharpened understanding, adaptive skill, delight in forms, delight
in manifestation, in comprehensible results. Pericles, Athens, Greece,
had been working in this element with the joy of genius not yet
chilled by any foresight of the detriment of an excess. They saw
before them no sinister political economy; no ominous Malthus; no
Paris or London; no pitiless subdivision of classes,- the doom of
the pin-makers, the doom of the weavers, of dressers, of
stockingers, of carders, of spinners, of colliers; no Ireland; no
Indian caste, superinduced by the efforts of Europe to throw it off.
The understanding was in its health and prime. Art was in its splendid
novelty. They cut the Pentelican marble as if it were snow, and
their perfect works in architecture and sculpture seemed things of
course, not more difficult than the completion of a new ship at the
Medford yards, or new mills at Lowell. These things are in course, and
may be taken for granted. The Roman legion, Byzantine legislation,
English trade, the saloons of Versailles, the cafes of Paris, the
steam-mill, steamboat, steam-coach, may all be seen in perspective;
the town-meeting, the ballot-box, the newspaper and cheap press.

  Meantime, Plato, in Egypt and in Eastern pilgrimages, imbibed the
idea of one Deity, in which all things are absorbed. The unity of Asia
and the detail of Europe; the infinitude of the Asiatic soul and the
defining, result-loving, machine-making, surface-seeking,
opera-going Europe,- Plato came to join, and, by contact, to enhance
the energy of each. The excellence of Europe and Asia are in his
brain. Metaphysics and natural philosophy expressed the genius of
Europe; he substructs the religion of Asia, as the base.

  In short, a balanced soul was born, perceptive of the two
elements. It is as easy to be great as to be small. The reason why
we do not at once believe in admirable souls is because they are not
in our experience. In actual life, they are so rare as to be
incredible; but primarily there is not only no presumption against
them, but the strongest presumption in favor of their appearance.
But whether voices were heard in the sky, or not; whether his mother
or his father dreamed that the infant man-child was the son of Apollo;
whether a swarm of bees settled on his lips, or not;- a man who
could see two sides of a thing was born. The wonderful synthesis so
familiar in nature; the upper and the under side of the medal of Jove;
the union of impossibilities, which reappears in every object; its
real and its ideal power,- was now also transferred entire to the
consciousness of a man.

  The balanced soul came. If he loved abstract truth, he saved himself
by propounding the most popular of all principles, the absolute
good, which rules rulers, and judges the judge. If he made
transcendental distinctions, he fortified himself by drawing all his
illustrations from sources disdained by orators and polite conversers;
from mares and puppies; from pitchers and soup-ladles; from cooks
and criers; the shops of potters, horse-doctors, butchers and
fishmongers. He cannot forgive in himself a partiality, but is
resolved that the two poles of thought shall appear in his
statement. His argument and his sentence are self-imposed and
spherical. The two poles appear; yes, and become two hands, to grasp
and appropriate their own.

  Every great artist has been such by synthesis. Our strength is
transitional, alternating; or, shall I say, a thread of two strands.
The sea-shore, sea seen from shore, shore seen from sea; the taste
of two metals in contact; and our enlarged powers at the approach
and at the departure of a friend; the experience of poetic
creativeness, which is not found in staying at home, nor yet in
traveling, but in transitions from one to the other, which must
therefore be adroitly managed to present as much transitional
surface as possible; this command of two elements must explain the
power and the charm of Plato. Art expresses the one or the same by the
different. Thought seeks to know unity in unity; poetry to show it
by variety; that is, always by an object or symbol. Plato keeps the
two vases, one of aether and one of pigment, at his side, and
invariably uses both. Things added to things, as statistics, civil
history, are inventories. Things used as language are inexhaustibly
attractive. Plato turns incessantly the obverse and the reverse of the
medal of Jove.

  To take an example:- The physical philosophers had sketched each his
theory of the world; the theory of atoms, of fire, of flux, of spirit;
theories mechanical and chemical in their genius. Plato, a master of
mathematics, studious of all natural laws and causes, feels these,
as second causes, to be no theories of the world but bare
inventories and lists. To the study of nature he therefore prefixes
the dogma,- "Let us declare the cause which led the Supreme Ordainer
to produce and compose the universe. He was good; and he who is good
has no kind of envy. Exempt from envy, he wished that all things
should be as much as possible like himself. Whosoever, taught by
wise men, shall admit this as the prime cause of the origin and
foundation of the world, will be in the truth."*(9) "All things are
for the sake of the good, and it is the cause of every thing
beautiful." This dogma animates and impersonates his philosophy.

  The synthesis which makes the character of his mind appears in all
his talents. Where there is great compass of wit, we usually find
excellencies that combine easily in the living man, but in description
appear incompatible. The mind of Plato is not to be exhibited by a
Chinese catalogue, but is to be apprehended by an original mind in the
exercise of its original power. In him the freest abandonment is
united with the precision of a geometer. His daring imagination
gives him the more solid grasp of facts; as the birds of highest
flight have the strongest alar bones. His patrician polish, his
intrinsic elegance, edged by an irony so subtle that it stings and
paralyzes, adorn the soundest health and strength of frame.
According to the old sentence, "If Jove should descend to the earth,
he would speak in the style of Plato."

  With this palatial air there is, for the direct aim of several of
his works and running through the tenor of them all, a certain
earnestness, which mounts, in the Republic and in the Phaedo, to
piety. He has been charged with feigning sickness at the time of the
death of Socrates. But the anecdotes that have come down from the
times attest his manly interference before the people in his
master's behalf, since even the savage cry of the assembly to Plato is
preserved; and the indignation towards popular government, in many
of his pieces, expresses a personal exasperation. He has a probity,
a native reverence for justice and honor, and a humanity which makes
him tender for the superstitions of the people. Add to this, he
believes that poetry, prophecy and the high insight are from a
wisdom of which man is not master; that the gods never philosophize,
but by a celestial mania these miracles are accomplished. Horsed on
these winged steeds, he sweeps the dim regions, visits worlds which
flesh cannot enter; he saw the souls in pain, he hears the doom of the
judge, he beholds the penal metempsychosis, the Fates, with the rock
and shears, and hears the intoxicating hum of their spindle.

  But his circumspection never forsook him. One would say he had
read the inscription on the gates of Busyrane,- "Be bold"; and on
the second gate,- "Be bold, be bold, and evermore be bold"; and then
again had paused well at the third gate,- "Be not too bold." His
strength is like the momentum of a falling planet, and his
discretion the return of its due and perfect curve,- so excellent is
his Greek love of boundary and his skill in definition. In reading
logarithms one is not more secure than in following Plato in his
flights. Nothing can be colder than his head, when the lightnings of
his imagination are playing in the sky. He has finished his thinking
before he brings it to the reader, and he abounds in the surprises
of a literary master. He has that opulence which furnishes, at every
turn, the precise weapon he needs. As the rich man wears no more
garments, drives no more horses, sits in no more chambers than the
poor,- but has that one dress, or equipage, or instrument, which is
fit for the hour and the need; so Plato, in his plenty, is never
restricted, but has the fit word. There is indeed no weapon in all the
armory of wit which he did not possess and use,- epic, analysis,
mania, intuition, music, satire and irony, down to the customary and
polite. His illustrations are poetry and his jests illustrations.
Socrates' profession of obstetric art*(10) is good philosophy; and his
finding that word "cookery," and "adulatory art," for rhetoric, in the
Gorgias, does us a substantial service still. No orator can measure in
effect with him who can give good nicknames.

  What moderation and understatement and checking his thunder in mid
volley! He has good-naturedly furnished the courtier and citizen
with all that can be said against the schools. "For philosophy is an
elegant thing, if any one modestly meddles with it; but if he is
conversant with it more than is becoming, it corrupts the man." He
could well afford to be generous,- he, who from the sunlike centrality
and reach of his vision, had a faith without cloud. Such as his
perception, was his speech: he plays with the doubt and makes the most
of it: he paints and quibbles; and by and by comes a sentence that
moves the sea and land. The admirable earnest comes not only at
intervals, in the perfect yes and no of the dialogue, but in bursts of
light. "I, therefore, Callicles, am persuaded by these accounts, and
consider how I may exhibit my soul before the judge in a healthy
condition. Wherefore, disregarding the honors that most men value, and
looking to the truth, I shall endeavor in reality to live as
virtuously as I can; and when I die, to die so. And I invite all other
men, to the utmost of my power; and you too I in turn invite to this
contest, which, I affirm, surpasses all contests here."*(11)

  He is a great average man; one who, to the best thinking, adds a
proportion and equality in his faculties, so that men see in him their
own dreams and glimpses made available and made to pass for what
they are. A great common-sense is his warrant and qualification to
be the world's interpreter. He has reason, as all the philosophic
and poetic class have: but he has also what they have not,- this
strong solving sense to reconcile his poetry with the appearances of
the world, and build a bridge from the streets of cities to the
Atlantis. He omits never this graduation, but slopes his thought,
however picturesque the precipice on one side, to an access from the
plain. He never writes in ecstasy, or catches us up into poetic
raptures.

  Plato apprehended the cardinal facts. He could prostrate himself
on the earth and cover his eyes whilst he adored that which cannot
be numbered, or gauged, or known, or named: that of which every
thing can be affirmed and denied: that "which is entity and
nonentity." He called it super-essential. He even stood ready, as in
the Parmenides, to demonstrate that it was so,- that this Being
exceeded the limits of intellect. No man ever more fully
acknowledged the Ineffable. Having paid his homage, as for the human
race, to the Illimitable, he then stood erect, and for the human
race affirmed, "And yet things are knowable!"- that is, the Asia in
his mind was first heartily honored,- the ocean of love and power,
before form, before will, before knowledge, the Same, the Good, the
One; and now, refreshed and empowered by this worship, the instinct of
Europe, namely, culture, returns; and he cries, "Yet things are
knowable!" They are knowable, because being from one, things
correspond. There is a scale; and the correspondence of heaven to
earth, of matter to mind, of the part to the whole, is our guide. As
there is a science of stars, called astronomy; a science of
quantities, called mathematics; a science of qualities, called
chemistry; so there is a science of sciences,- I call it Dialectic,-
which is the Intellect discriminating the false and the true. It rests
on the observation of identity and diversity; for to judge is to unite
to an object the notion which belongs to it. The sciences, even the
best,- mathematics and astronomy,- are like sportsmen, who seize
whatever prey offers, even without being able to make any use of it.
Dialectic must teach the use of them. "This is of that rank that no
intellectual man will enter on any study for its own sake, but only
with a view to advance himself in that one sole science which embraces
all."*(12)

  "The essence or peculiarity of man is to comprehend a whole; or that
which in the diversity of sensations can be comprised under a rational
unity." "The soul which has never perceived the truth, cannot pass
into the human form."*(13) I announce to men the Intellect. I announce
the good of being interpenetrated by the mind that made nature: this
benefit, namely, that it can understand nature, which it made and
maketh. Nature is good, but intellect is better: as the lawgiver is
before the law-receiver. I give you joy, O sons of men! that truth
is altogether wholesome; that we have hope to search out what might be
the very self of everything. The misery of man is to be baulked of the
sight of essence and to be stuffed with conjectures; but the supreme
good is reality; the supreme beauty is reality; and all virtue and all
felicity depend on this science of the real: for courage is nothing
else than knowledge; the fairest fortune that can befall man is to
be guided by his daemon to that which is truly his own. This also is
the essence of justice,- to attend every one his own: nay, the
notion of virtue is not to be arrived at except through direct
contemplation of the divine essence. Courage then for "the
persuasion that we must search that which we do not know, will
render us, beyond comparison, better, braver and more industrious than
if we thought it impossible to discover what we do not know, and
useless to search for it." He secures a position not to be
commanded, by his passion for reality; valuing philosophy only as it
is the pleasure of conversing with real being.

  Thus, full of the genius of Europe, he said, Culture. He saw the
institutions of Sparta and recognized, more genially one would say
than any since, the hope of education. He delighted in every
accomplishment, in every graceful and useful and truthful performance;
above all in the splendors of genius and intellectual achievement.
"The whole of life, O Socrates," said Glauco, "is, with the wise,
the measure of hearing such discourses as these." What a price he sets
on the feats of talent, on the powers of Pericles, of Isocrates, of
Parmenides! What price above price on the talents themselves! He
called the several faculties, gods, in his beautiful personation. What
value he gives to the art of gymnastic in education; what to geometry;
what to music; what to astronomy, whose appeasing and medicinal
power he celebrates! In the Timaeus he indicates the highest
employment of the eyes. "By us it is asserted that God invented and
bestowed sight on us for this purpose,- that on surveying the
circles of intelligence in the heavens, we might properly employ those
of our own minds, which, though disturbed when compared with the
others that are uniform, are still allied to their circulations; and
that having thus learned, and being naturally possessed of a correct
reasoning faculty, we might, by imitating the uniform revolutions of
divinity, set right our own wanderings and blunders." And in the
Republic,- "By each of these disciplines a certain organ of the soul
is both purified and reanimated which is blinded and buried by studies
of another kind; an organ better worth saving than ten thousand
eyes, since truth is perceived by this alone."

  He said, Culture; but he first admitted its basis, and gave
immeasurably the first place to advantages of nature. His patrician
tastes laid stress on the distinctions of birth. In the doctrine of
the organic character and disposition is the origin of caste. "Such as
were fit to govern, into their composition the informing Deity mingled
gold; into the military, silver; iron and brass for husbandmen and
artificers." The East confirms itself, in all ages, in this faith. The
Koran is explicit on this point of caste. "Men have their metal, as of
gold and silver. Those of you who were the worthy ones in the state of
ignorance, will be the worthy ones in the state of faith, as soon as
you embrace it." Plato was not less firm. "Of the five orders of
things, only four can be taught to the generality of men." In the
Republic he insists on the temperaments of the youth, as first of
the first.

  A happier example of the stress laid on nature is in the dialogue
with the young Theages, who wishes to receive lessons from Socrates.
Socrates declares that if some have grown wise by associating with
him, no thanks are due to him; but, simply, whilst they were with
him they grew wise, not because of him; he pretends not to know the
way of it. "It is adverse to many, nor can those be benefited by
associating with me whom the Daemon opposes; so that it is not
possible for me to live with these. With many however he does not
prevent me from conversing, who yet are not at all benefited by
associating with me. Such, O Theages, is the association with me; for,
if it pleases the God, you will make great and rapid proficiency:
you will not, if he does not please. Judge whether it is not safer
to be instructed by some one of those who have power over the
benefit which they impart to men, than by me, who benefit or not, just
as it may happen." As if he had said, "I have no system. I cannot be
answerable for you. You will be what you must. If there is love
between us, inconceivably delicious and profitable will our
intercourse be; if not, your time is lost and you will only annoy
me. I shall seem to you stupid, and the reputation I have, false.
Quite above us, beyond the will of you or me, is this secret
affinity or repulsion laid. All my good is magnetic, and I educate,
not by lessons, but by going about my business."

  He said, Culture; he said, Nature; and he failed not to add,
"There is also the divine." There is no thought in any mind but it
quickly tends to convert itself into a power and organizes a huge
instrumentality of means. Plato, lover of limits, loved the
illimitable, saw the enlargement and nobility which come from truth
itself and good itself, and attempted as if on the part of the human
intellect, once for all to do it adequate homage,- homage fit for
the immense soul to receive, and yet homage becoming the intellect
to render. He said then, "Our faculties run out into infinity, and
return to us thence. We can define but a little way; but here is a
fact which will not be skipped, and which to shut our eyes upon is
suicide. All things are in a scale; and, begin where we will, ascend
and ascend. All things are symbolical; and what we call results are
beginnings."

  A key to the method and completeness of Plato is his twice
bisected line. After he has illustrated the relation between the
absolute good and true and the forms of the intelligible world, he
says: "Let there be a line cut in two unequal parts. Cut again each of
these two main parts,- one representing the visible, the other the
intelligible world,- and let these two new sections represent the
bright part and the dark part of each of these worlds. You will
have, for one of the sections of the visible world, images, that is,
both shadows and reflections;- for the other section, the objects of
these images, that is, plants, animals, and the works of art and
nature. Then divide the intelligible world in like manner; the one
section will be of opinions and hypotheses, and the other section of
truths."*(14) To these four sections, the four operations of the
soul correspond,- conjecture, faith, understanding, reason. As every
pool reflects the image of the sun, so every thought and thing
restores us an image and creature of the supreme Good. The universe is
perforated by a million channels for his activity. All things mount
and mount.

  All his thought has this ascension; in Phaedrus, teaching that
beauty is the most lovely of all things, exciting hilarity and
shedding desire and confidence through the universe wherever it
enters, and it enters in some degree into all things:- but that
there is another, which is as much more beautiful than beauty as
beauty is than chaos; namely, wisdom, which our wonderful organ of
sight cannot reach unto, but which, could it be seen, would ravish
us with its perfect reality. He has the same regard to it as the
source of excellence in works of art. When an artificer, he says, in
the fabrication of any work, looks to that which always subsists
according to the same; and, employing a model of this kind,
expresses its idea and power in his work,- it must follow that his
production should be beautiful. But when he beholds that which is born
and dies, it will be far from beautiful.

  Thus ever: the Banquet is a teaching in the same spirit, familiar
now to all the poetry and to all the sermons of the world, that the
love of the sexes is initial, and symbolizes at a distance the passion
of the soul for that immense lake of beauty it exists to seek. This
faith in the Divinity is never out of mind, and constitutes the ground
of all his dogmas. Body cannot teach wisdom;- God only. In the same
mind he constantly affirms that virtue cannot be taught; that it is
not a science, but an inspiration; that the greatest goods are
produced to us through mania and are assigned to us by a divine gift.

  This leads me to that central figure which he has established in his
Academy as the organ through which every considered opinion shall be
announced, and whose biography he has likewise so labored that the
historic facts are lost in the light of Plato's mind. Socrates and
Plato are the double star which the most powerful instruments will not
entirely separate. Socrates again, in his traits and genius, is the
best example of that synthesis which constitutes Plato's extraordinary
power. Socrates, a man of humble stem, but honest enough; of the
commonest history; of a personal homeliness so remarkable as to be a
cause of wit in others:- the rather that his broad good nature and
exquisite taste for a joke invited the sally, which was sure to be
paid. The players personated him on the stage; the potters copied
his ugly face on their stone jugs. He was a cool fellow, adding to his
humor a perfect temper and a knowledge of his man, be he who he
might whom he talked with, which laid the companion open to certain
defeat in any debate,- and in debate he immoderately delighted. The
young men are prodigiously fond of him and invite him to their feasts,
whither he goes for conversation. He can drink, too; has the strongest
head in Athens; and after leaving the whole party under the table,
goes away as if nothing had happened, to begin new dialogues with
somebody that is sober. In short, he was what our country-people
call an old one.

  He affected a good many citizen-like tastes, was monstrously fond of
Athens, hated trees, never willingly went beyond the walls, knew the
old characters, valued the bores and philistines, thought every
thing in Athens a little better than anything in any other place. He
was plain as a Quaker in habit and speech, affected low phrases, and
illustrations from cocks and quails, soup-pans and sycamore-spoons,
grooms and farriers, and unnamable offices,- especially if he talked
with any superfine person. He had a Franklin-like wisdom. Thus he
showed one who was afraid to go on foot to Olympia, that it was no
more than his daily walk within doors, if continuously extended, would
easily reach.

  Plain old uncle as he was, with his great ears, an immense
talker,- the rumor ran that on one or two occasions, in the war with
Boeotia, he had shown a determination which had covered the retreat of
a troop; and there was some story that under cover of folly, he had,
in the city government, when one day he chanced to hold a seat
there, evinced a courage in opposing singly the popular voice, which
had well-nigh ruined him. He is very poor; but then he is hardy as a
soldier, and can live on a few olives; usually, in the strictest
sense, on bread and water, except when entertained by his friends. His
necessary expenses were exceedingly small, and no one could live as he
did. He wore no under garment; his upper garment was the same for
summer and winter, and he went barefooted; and it is said that to
procure the pleasure, which he loves, of talking at his ease all day
with the most elegant and cultivated young men, he will now and then
return to his shop and carve statues, good or bad, for sale. However
that be, it is certain that he had grown to delight in nothing else
than this conversation; and that, under his hypocritical pretence of
knowing nothing, he attacks and brings down all the fine speakers, all
the fine philosophers of Athens, whether natives or strangers from
Asia Minor and the islands. Nobody can refuse to talk with him, he
is so honest and really curious to know; a man who was willingly
confuted if he did not speak the truth, and who willingly confuted
others asserting what was false; and not less pleased when confuted
than when confuting; for he thought not any evil happened to men of
such a magnitude as false opinion respecting the just and unjust. A
pitiless disputant, who knows nothing, but the bounds of whose
conquering intelligence no man had ever reached; whose temper was
imperturbable; whose dreadful logic was always leisurely and sportive;
so careless and ignorant as to disarm the wariest and draw them, in
the pleasantest manner, into horrible doubts and confusion. But he
always knew the way out; knew it, yet would not tell it. No escape; he
drives them to terrible choices by his dilemmas, and tosses the
Hippiases and Gorgiases with their grand reputations, as a boy
tosses his balls. The tyrannous realist!- Meno has discoursed a
thousand times, at length, on virtue, before many companies, and
very well, as it appeared to him; but at this moment he cannot even
tell what it is,- this cramp-fish of a Socrates has so bewitched him.

  This hard-headed humorist, whose strange conceits, drollery and
bonhommie diverted the young patricians, whilst the rumor of his
sayings and quibbles gets abroad every day,- turns out, in the sequel,
to have a probity as invincible as his logic, and to be either insane,
or at least, under cover of this play, enthusiastic in his religion.
When accused before the judges of subverting the popular creed, he
affirms the immortality of the soul, the future reward and punishment;
and refusing to recant, in a caprice of the popular government was
condemned to die, and sent to the prison. Socrates entered the
prison and took away all ignominy from the place, which could not be a
prison whilst he was there. Crito bribed the jailer; but Socrates
would not go out by treachery. "Whatever inconvenience ensue,
nothing is to be preferred before justice. These things I hear like
pipes and drums, whose sound makes me deaf to every thing you say."
The fame of this prison, the fame of the discourses there and the
drinking of the hemlock are one of the most precious passages in the
history of the world.

  The rare coincidence, in one ugly body, of the droll and the martyr,
the keen street and market debater with the sweetest saint known to
any history at that time, had forcibly struck the mind of Plato, so
capacious of these contrasts; and the figure of Socrates by a
necessity placed itself in the foreground of the scene, as the fittest
dispenser of the intellectual treasures he had to communicate. It
was a rare fortune that this Aesop of the mob and this robed scholar
should meet, to make each other immortal in their mutual faculty.
The strange synthesis in the character of Socrates capped the
synthesis in the mind of Plato. Moreover by this means he was able, in
the direct way and without envy to avail himself of the wit and weight
of Socrates, to which unquestionably his own debt was great; and these
derived again their principal advantage from the perfect art of Plato.

  It remains to say that the defect of Plato in power is only that
which results inevitably from his quality. He is intellectual in his
aim; and therefore, in expression, literary. Mounting into heaven,
diving into the pit, expounding the laws of the state, the passion
of love, the remorse of crime, the hope of the parting soul,- he is
literary, and never otherwise. It is almost the sole deduction from
the merit of Plato that his writings have not,- what is no doubt
incident to this regnancy of intellect in his work,- the vital
authority which the screams of prophets and the sermons of
unlettered Arabs and Jews possess. There is an interval; and to
cohesion, contact is necessary.

  I know not what can be said in reply to this criticism but that we
have come to a fact in the nature of things: an oak is not an
orange. The qualities of sugar remain with sugar, and those of salt
with salt.

  In the second place, he has not a system. The dearest defenders
and disciples are at fault. He attempted a theory of the universe, and
his theory is not complete or self-evident. One man thinks he means
this, and another that; he has said one thing in one place, and the
reverse of it in another place. He is charged with having failed to
make the transition from ideas to matter. Here is the world, sound
as a nut, perfect, not the smallest piece of chaos left, never a
stitch nor an end, not a mark of haste, or botching, or second
thought; but the theory of the world is a thing of shreds and patches.

  The longest wave is quickly lost in the sea. Plato would willingly
have a Platonism, a known and accurate expression for the world, and
it should be accurate. It shall be the world passed through the mind
of Plato,- nothing less. Every atom shall have the Platonic tinge;
every atom, every relation or quality you knew before, you shall
know again and find here, but now ordered; not nature, but art. And
you shall feel that Alexander indeed overran, with men and horses,
some countries of the planet; but countries, and things of which
countries are made, elements, planet itself, laws of planet and of
men, have passed through this man as bread into his body, and become
no longer bread, but body: so all this mammoth morsel has become
Plato. He has clapped copyright on the world. This is the ambition
of individualism. But the mouthful proves too large. Boa constrictor
has good will to eat it, but he is foiled. He falls abroad in the
attempt; and biting, gets strangled: the bitten world holds the
biter fast by his own teeth. There he perishes: unconquered nature
lives on and forgets him. So it fares with all: so must it fare with
Plato. In view of eternal nature, Plato turns out to be
philosophical exercitations. He argues on this side and on that. The
acutest German, the lovingest disciple, could never tell what
Platonism was; indeed, admirable texts can be quoted on both sides
of every great question from him.*(15)

  These things we are forced to say if we must consider the effort
of Plato or of any philosopher to dispose of nature,- which will not
be disposed of. No power of genius has ever yet had the smallest
success in explaining existence. The perfect enigma remains. But there
is an injustice in assuming this ambition for Plato. Let us not seem
to treat with flippancy his venerable name. Men, in proportion to
their intellect, have admitted his transcendent claims. The way to
know him is to compare him, not with nature, but with other men. How
many ages have gone by, and he remains unapproached! A chief structure
of human wit, like Karnac, or the medieval cathedrals, or the Etrurian
remains, it requires all the breath of human faculty to know it. I
think it is trueliest seen when seen with the most respect. His
sense deepens, his merits multiply, with study. When we say, Here is a
fine collection of fables; or when we praise the style, or the
common sense, or arithmetic, we speak as boys, and much of our
impatient criticism of the dialectic, I suspect, is no better.

  The criticism is like our impatience of miles, when we are in a
hurry; but it is still best that a mile should have seventeen
hundred and sixty yards. The great-eyed Plato proportioned the
lights and shades after the genius of our life.

                   PLATO: NEW READINGS

  The publication, in Mr. Bohn's "Serial Library," of the excellent
translations of Plato, which we esteem one of the chief benefits the
cheap press has yielded, gives us an occasion to take hastily a few
more notes of the elevation and bearings of this fixed star; or to add
a bulletin, like the journals, of Plato at the latest dates.

  Modern science, by the extent of its generalization, has learned
to indemnify the student of man for the defects of individuals by
tracing growth and ascent in races; and, by the simple expedient of
lighting up the vast background, generates a feeling of complacency
and hope. The human being has the saurian and the plant in his rear.
His arts and sciences, the easy issue of his brain, look glorious when
prospectively beheld from the distant brain of ox, crocodile and fish.
It seems as if nature, in regarding the geologic night behind her,
when, in five or six millenniums, she had turned out five or six
men, as Homer, Phidias, Menu and Columbus, was no wise discontented
with the result. These samples attested the virtue of the tree.
These were a clear amelioration of trilobite and saurus, and a good
basis for further proceeding. With this artist, time and space are
cheap, and she is insensible to what you say of tedious preparation.
She waited tranquilly the flowing periods of paleontology, for the
hour to be struck when man should arrive. Then periods must pass
before the motion of the earth can be suspected; then before the map
of the instincts and the cultivable powers can be drawn. But as of
races, so the succession of individual men is fatal and beautiful, and
Plato has the fortune in the history of mankind to mark an epoch.

  Plato's fame does not stand on a syllogism, or on any masterpieces
of the Socratic reasoning, or on any thesis, as for example the
immortality of the soul. He is more than an expert, or a schoolman, or
a geometer, or the prophet of a peculiar message. He represents the
privilege of the intellect, the power, namely, of carrying up every
fact to successive platforms and so disclosing in every fact a germ of
expansion. These expansions are in the essence of thought. The
naturalist would never help us to them by any discoveries of the
extent of the universe, but is as poor when cataloguing the resolved
nebula of Orion, as when measuring the angles of an acre. But the
Republic of Plato, by these expansions, may be said to require and
so to anticipate the astronomy of Laplace. The expansions are organic.
The mind does not create what it perceives, any more than the eye
creates the rose. In ascribing to Plato the merit of announcing
them, we only say, Here was a more complete man, who could apply to
nature the whole scale of the senses, the understanding and the
reason. These expansions or extensions consist in continuing the
spiritual sight where the horizon falls on our natural vision, and
by this second sight discovering the long lines of law which shoot
in every direction. Everywhere he stands on a path which has no end,
but runs continuously round the universe. Therefore every word becomes
an exponent of nature. Whatever he looks upon discloses a second
sense, and ulterior senses. His perception of the generation of
contraries, of death out of life and life out of death,- that law by
which, in nature, decomposition is recomposition, and putrefaction and
cholera are only signals of a new creation; his discernment of the
little in the large and the large in the small; studying the state
in the citizen and the citizen in the state; and leaving it doubtful
whether he exhibited the Republic as an allegory on the education of
the private soul; his beautiful definitions of ideas, of time, of
form, of figure, of the line, sometimes hypothetically given, as his
defining of virtue, courage, justice, temperance; his love of the
apologue, and his apologues themselves; the cave of Trophonius; the
ring of Gyges; the charioteer and two horses; the golden, silver,
brass and iron temperaments; Theuth and Thamus; and the visions of
Hades and the Fates,- fables which have imprinted themselves in the
human memory like the signs of the zodiac; his soliform eye and his
boniform soul;*(16) his doctrine of assimilation; his doctrine of
reminiscence; his clear vision of the laws of return, or reaction,
which secure instant justice throughout the universe, instanced
everywhere, but specially in the doctrine, "what comes from God to us,
returns from us to God," and in Socrates' belief that the laws below
are sisters of the laws above.

  More striking examples are his moral conclusions. Plato affirms
the coincidence of science and virtue; for vice can never know
itself and virtue, but virtue knows both itself and vice. The eye
attested that justice was best, as long as it was profitable; Plato
affirms that it is profitable throughout; that the profit is
intrinsic, though the just conceal his justice from gods and men; that
it is better to suffer injustice than to do it; that the sinner
ought to covet punishment; that the lie was more hurtful than
homicide; and that ignorance, or the involuntary lie, was more
calamitous than involuntary homicide; that the soul is unwillingly
deprived of true opinions, and that no man sins willingly; that the
order or proceeding of nature was from the mind to the body, and,
though a sound body cannot restore an unsound mind, yet a good soul
can, by its virtue, render the body the best possible. The intelligent
have a right over the ignorant, namely, the right of instructing them.
The right punishment of one out of tune is to make him play in tune;
the fine which the good, refusing to govern, ought to pay, is, to be
governed by a worse man; that his guards shall not handle gold and
silver, but shall be instructed that there is gold and silver in their
souls, which will make men willing to give them every thing which they
need.

  This second sight explains the stress laid on geometry. He saw
that the globe of earth was not more lawful and precise than was the
supersensible; that a celestial geometry was in place there, as a
logic of lines and angles here below; that the world was throughout
mathematical; the proportions are constant of oxygen, azote and
lime; there is just so much water and slate and magnesia; not less are
the proportions constant of the moral elements.

  This eldest Goethe, hating varnish and falsehood, delighted in
revealing the real at the base of the accidental; in discovering
connection, continuity and representation everywhere, hating
insulation; and appears like the god of wealth among the cabins of
vagabonds, opening power and capability in everything he touches.
Ethical science was new and vacant when Plato could write thus:- "Of
all whose arguments are left to the men of the present time, no one
has ever yet condemned injustice, or praised justice, otherwise than
as respects the repute, honors and emoluments arising therefrom;
while, as respects either of them in itself, and subsisting by its own
power in the soul of the possessor, and concealed both from gods and
men, no one has yet sufficiently investigated, either in poetry or
prose writings,- how, namely, that injustice is the greatest of all
the evils that the soul has within it, and justice the greatest good."

  His definition of ideas, as what is simple, permanent, uniform and
self-existent, forever discriminating them from the notions of the
understanding, marks an era in the world. He was born to behold the
self-evolving power of spirit, endless, generator of new ends; a power
which is the key at once to the centrality and the evanescence of
things. Plato is so centred that he can well spare all his dogmas.
Thus the fact of knowledge and ideas reveals to him the fact of
eternity; and the doctrine of reminiscence he offers as the most
probable particular explication. Call that fanciful,- it matters
not: the connection between our knowledge and the abyss of being is
still real, and the explication must be not less magnificent.

  He has indicated every eminent point in speculation. He wrote on the
scale of the mind itself, so that all things have symmetry in his
tablet. He put in all the past, without weariness, and descended
into detail with a courage like that he witnessed in nature. One would
say that his forerunners had mapped out each a farm or a district or
an island, in intellectual geography, but that Plato first drew the
sphere. He domesticates the soul in nature: man is the microcosm.
All the circles of the visible heaven represent as many circles in the
rational soul. There is no lawless particle, and there is nothing
casual in the action of the human mind. The names of things, too,
are fatal, following the nature of things. All the gods of the
Pantheon are, by their names, significant of a profound sense. The
gods are the ideas. Pan is speech, or manifestation; Saturn, the
contemplative; Jove, the regal soul; and Mars, passion. Venus is
proportion; Calliope, the soul of the world; Aglaia, intellectual
illustration.

  These thoughts, in sparkles of light, had appeared often to pious
and to poetic souls; but this well-bred, all-knowing Greek geometer
comes with command, gathers them all up into rank and gradation, the
Euclid of holiness, and marries the two parts of nature. Before all
men, he saw the intellectual values of the moral sentiment. He
describes his own ideal, when he paints, in Timaeus, a god leading
things from disorder into order. He kindled a fire so truly in the
centre that we see the sphere illuminated, and can distinguish
poles, equator and lines of latitude, every arc and node: a theory
so averaged, so modulated, that you would say the winds of ages had
swept through this rhythmic structure, and not that it was the brief
extempore blotting of one short-lived scribe. Hence it has happened
that a very well-marked class of souls, namely those who delight in
giving a spiritual, that is, an ethico-intellectual expression to
every truth, by exhibiting an ulterior end which is yet legitimate
to it,- are said to Platonize. Thus, Michael Angelo is a Platonist
in his sonnets: Shakespeare is a Platonist when he writes,-

             "Nature is made better by no mean,

              But nature makes that mean,"

or,-

                             "He, that can endure

           To follow with allegiance a fallen lord,

           Does conquer him that did his master conquer,

           And earns a place in the story."

Hamlet is a pure Platonist, and 'tis the magnitude only of
Shakespeare's proper genius that hinders him from being classed as the
most eminent of this school. Swedenborg, throughout his prose poem
of "Conjugal Love," is a Platonist.

  His subtlety commended him to men of thought. The secret of his
popular success is the moral aim which endeared him to mankind.
"Intellect," he said, "is king of heaven and of earth"; but in
Plato, intellect is always moral. His writings have also the
sempiternal youth of poetry. For their arguments, most of them,
might have been couched in sonnets: and poetry has never soared higher
than in the Timaeus and the Phaedrus. As the poet, too, he is only
contemplative. He did not, like Pythagoras, break himself with an
institution. All his painting in the Republic must be esteemed
mythical, with intent to bring out, sometimes in violent colors, his
thought. You cannot institute, without peril of charlatanism.

  It was a high scheme, his absolute privilege for the best (which, to
make emphatic, he expressed by community of women), as the premium
which he would set on grandeur. There shall be exempts of two kinds:
first, those who by demerit have put themselves below protection,-
outlaws; and secondly, those who by eminence of nature and desert
are out of the reach of your rewards. Let such be free of the city and
above the law. We confide them to themselves; let them do with us as
they will. Let none presume to measure the irregularities of Michael
Angelo and Socrates by village scales.

  In his eighth book of the Republic, he throws a little
mathematical dust in our eyes. I am sorry to see him, after such noble
superiorities, permitting the lie to governors. Plato plays Providence
a little with the baser sort, as people allow themselves with their
dogs and cats.
SWEDENBORG

                       SWEDENBORG

                     or, The Mystic

  AMONG eminent persons, those who are most dear to men are not of the
class which the economist calls producers: they have nothing in
their hands; they have not cultivated corn, nor made bread; they
have not led out a colony, nor invented a loom. A higher class, in the
estimation and love of this city-building market-going race of
mankind, are the poets, who, from the intellectual kingdom, feed the
thought and imagination with ideas and pictures which raise men out of
the world of corn and money, and console them for the shortcomings
of the day and the meanness of labor and traffic. Then, also, the
philosopher has his value, who flatters the intellect of this
laborer by engaging him with subtleties which instruct him in new
faculties. Others may build cities; he is to understand them and
keep them in awe. But there is a class who lead us into another
region,- the world of morals or of will. What is singular about this
region of thought is its claim. Wherever the sentiment of right
comes in, it takes precedence of every thing else. For other things, I
make poetry of them; but the moral sentiment makes poetry of me.

  I have sometimes thought that he would render the greatest service
to modern criticism, who should draw the line of relation that
subsists between Shakespeare and Swedenborg. The human mind stands
ever in perplexity, demanding intellect, demanding sanctity, impatient
equally of each without the other. The reconciler has not yet
appeared. If we tire of the saints, Shakespeare is our city of refuge.
Yet the instincts presently teach that the problem of essence must
take precedence of all others;- the questions of Whence? What? and
Whither? and the solution of these must be in a life, and not in a
book. A drama or poem is a proximate or oblique reply; but Moses,
Menu, Jesus, work directly on this problem. The atmosphere of moral
sentiment is a region of grandeur which reduces all material
magnificence to toys, yet opens to every wretch that has reason the
doors of the universe. Almost with a fierce haste it lays its empire
on the man. In the language of the Koran, "God said, The heaven and
the earth and all that is between them, think ye that we created
them in jest, and that ye shall not return to us?" It is the kingdom
of the will, and by inspiring the will, which is the seat of
personality, seems to convert the universe into a person;-

         "The realms of being to no other bow,

          Not only all are thine, but all are Thou."

  All men are commanded by the saint. The Koran makes a distinct class
of those who are by nature good, and whose goodness has an influence
on others, and pronounces this class to be the aim of creation: the
other classes are admitted to the feast of being, only as following in
the train of this. And the Persian poet exclaims to a soul of this
kind,-

         "Go boldly forth, and feast on being's banquet;

          Thou art the called,- the rest admitted with thee."

The privilege of this caste is an access to the secrets and
structure of nature by some higher method than by experience. In
common parlance, what one man is said to learn by experience, a man of
extraordinary sagacity is said, without experience, to divine. The
Arabians say, that Abul Khain, the mystic, and Abu Ali Seena, the
philosopher, conferred together; and, on parting, the philosopher
said, "All that he sees, I know"; and the mystic said, "All that he
knows, I see." If one should ask the reason of this intuition, the
solution would lead us into that property which Plato denoted as
Reminiscence, and which is implied by the Bramins in the tenet of
Transmigration. The soul having been often born, or, as the Hindoos
say, "travelling the path of existence through thousands of births,"
having beheld the things which are here, those which are in heaven and
those which are beneath, there is nothing of which she has not
gained the knowledge: no wonder that she is able to recollect, in
regard to any one thing, what formerly she knew. "For, all things in
nature being linked and related, and the soul having heretofore
known all, nothing hinders but that any man who has recalled to
mind, or according to the common phrase has learned, one thing only,
should of himself recover all his ancient knowledge, and find out
again all the rest, if he have but courage and faint not in the
midst of his researches. For inquiry and learning is reminiscence
all."*(17) How much more, if he that inquires be a holy and godlike
soul For by being assimilated to the original soul, by whom and
after whom all things subsist, the soul of man does then easily flow
into all things, and all things flow into it: they mix; and he is
present and sympathetic with their structure and law.

  This path is difficult, secret and beset with terror. The ancients
called it ecstasy or absence,- a getting out of their bodies to think.
All religious history contains traces of the trance of saints,- a
beatitude, but without any sign of joy; earnest, solitary, even sad;
"the flight," Plotinus called it, "of the alone to the alone"; Muesiz,
the closing of the eyes,- whence our word, Mystic. The trances of
Socrates, Plotinus, Porphyry, Behmen, Bunyan, Fox, Pascal, Guyon,
Swedenborg, will readily come to mind. But what as readily comes to
mind is the accompaniment of disease. This beatitude comes in
terror, and with shocks to the mind of the receiver.

         "It o'erinforms the tenement of clay,"

and drives the man mad; or gives a certain violent bias which taints
his judgment. In the chief examples of religious illumination somewhat
morbid has mingled, in spite of the unquestionable increase of
mental power. Must the highest good drag after it a quality which
neutralizes and discredits it?-

                                "Indeed, it takes

     From our achievements, when performed at height,

     The pith and marrow of our attribute."

Shall we say, that the economical mother disburses so much earth and
so much fire, by weight and meter, to make a man, and will not add a
pennyweight, though a nation is perishing for a leader? Therefore
the men of God purchased their science by folly or pain. If you will
have pure carbon, carbuncle, or diamond, to make the brain
transparent, the trunk and organs shall be so much the grosser:
instead of porcelain they are potter's earth, clay, or mud.

  In modern times no such remarkable example of this introverted
mind has occurred as in Emanuel Swedenborg, born in Stockholm, in
1688. This man, who appeared to his contemporaries a visionary and
elixir of moonbeams, no doubt led the most real life of any man then
in the world: and now, when the royal and ducal Frederics,
Christians and Brunswicks of that day have slid into oblivion, he
begins to spread himself into the minds of thousands. As happens in
great men, he seemed, by the variety and amount of his powers, to be a
composition of several persons,- like the giant fruits which are
matured in gardens by the union of four or five single blossoms. His
frame is on a larger scale and possesses the advantages of size. As it
is easier to see the reflection of the great sphere in large globes,
though defaced by some crack or blemish, than in drops of water, so
men of large calibre, though with some eccentricity or madness, like
Pascal or Newton, help us more than balanced mediocre minds.

  His youth and training could not fail to be extraordinary. Such a
boy could not whistle or dance, but goes grubbing into mines and
mountains, prying into chemistry and optics, physiology, mathematics
and astronomy, to find images fit for the measure of his versatile and
capacious brain. He was a scholar from a child, and was educated at
Upsala. At the age of twenty-eight he was made Assessor of the Board
of Mines by Charles XII. In 1716, he left home for four years and
visited the universities of England, Holland, France and Germany. He
performed a notable feat of engineering in 1718, at the siege of
Frederikshald, by hauling two galleys, five boats and a sloop, some
fourteen English miles overland, for the royal service. In 1721 he
journeyed over Europe to examine mines and smelting works. He
published in 1716 his Daedalus Hyperboreus, and from this time for the
next thirty years was employed in the composition and publication of
his scientific works. With the like force he threw himself into
theology. In 1743, when he was fifty-four years old, what is called
his illumination began. All his metallurgy and transportation of ships
overland was absorbed into this ecstasy. He ceased to publish any more
scientific books, withdrew from his practical labors and devoted
himself to the writing and publication of his voluminous theological
works, which were printed at his own expense, or at that of the Duke
of Brunswick or other prince, at Dresden, Leipsic, London, or
Amsterdam. Later, he resigned his office of Assessor: the salary
attached to this office continued to be paid to him during his life.
His duties had brought him into intimate acquaintance with King
Charles XII, by whom he was much consulted and honored. The like favor
was continued to him by his successor. At the Diet of 1751, Count
Hopken says, the most solid memorials on finance were from his pen. In
Sweden he appears to have attracted a marked regard. His rare
science and practical skill, and the added fame of second sight and
extraordinary religious knowledge and gifts, drew to him queens,
nobles, clergy, shipmasters and people about the ports through which
he was wont to pass in his many voyages. The clergy interfered a
little with the importation and publication of his religious works,
but he seems to have kept the friendship of men in power. He was never
married. He had great modesty and gentleness of bearing. His habits
were simple; he lived on bread, milk and vegetables; he lived in a
house situated in a large garden; he went several times to England,
where he does not seem to have attracted any attention whatever from
the learned or the eminent; and died at London, March 29, 1772, of
apoplexy, in his eighty-fifth year. He is described, when in London,
as a man of a quiet, clerical habit, not averse to tea and coffee, and
kind to children. He wore a sword when in full velvet dress, and,
whenever he walked out, carried a gold-headed cane. There is a
common portrait of him in antique coat and wig, but the face has a
wandering or vacant air.

  The genius which was to penetrate the science of the age with a
far more subtle science; to pass the bounds of space and time, venture
into the dim spirit-realm, and attempt to establish a new religion
in the world,- began its lessons in quarries and forges, in the
smelting-pot and crucible, in ship-yards and dissecting-rooms. No
one man is perhaps able to judge of the merits of his works on so many
subjects. One is glad to learn that his books on mines and metals
are held in the highest esteem by those who understand these
matters. It seems that he anticipated much science of the nineteenth
century; anticipated, in astronomy, the discovery of the seventh
planet,- but, unhappily, not also of the eighth; anticipated the views
of modern astronomy in regard to the generation of earths by the
sun; in magnetism, some important experiments and conclusions of later
students; in chemistry, the atomic theory; in anatomy, the discoveries
of Schlichting, Monro and Wilson; and first demonstrated the office of
the lungs. His excellent English editor magnanimously lays no stress
on his discoveries, since he was too great to care to be original; and
we are to judge, by what he can spare, of what remains.

  A colossal soul, he lies vast abroad on his times, uncomprehended by
them, and requires a long focal distance to be seen; suggests, as
Aristotle, Bacon, Selden,*(18) Humboldt, that a certain vastness of
learning, or quasi omnipresence of the human soul in nature, is
possible. His superb speculation, as from a tower, over nature and
arts, without ever losing sight of the texture and sequence of things,
almost realizes his own picture, in the "Principia," of the original
integrity of man. Over and above the merit of his particular
discoveries, is the capital merit of his self-equality. A drop of
water has the properties of the sea, but cannot exhibit a storm. There
is beauty of a concert, as well as of a flute; strength of a host,
as well as of a hero; and, in Swedenborg, those who are best
acquainted with modern books will most admire the merit of mass. One
of the missouriums and mastodons of literature, he is not to be
measured by whole colleges of ordinary scholars. His stalwart presence
would flutter the gowns of an university. Our books are false by being
fragmentary: their sentences are bonmots, and not parts of natural
discourse; childish expressions of surprise or pleasure in nature; or,
worse, owing a brief notoriety to their petulance, or aversion from
the order of nature;- being some curiosity or oddity, designedly not
in harmony with nature and purposely framed to excite surprise, as
jugglers do by concealing their means. But Swedenborg is systematic
and respective of the world in every sentence; all the means are
orderly given; his faculties work with astronomic punctuality, and
this admirable writing is pure from all pertness or egotism.

  Swedenborg was born into an atmosphere of great ideas. It is hard to
say what was his own: yet his life was dignified by noblest pictures
of the universe. The robust Aristotelian method, with its breadth
and adequateness, shaming our sterile and linear logic by its genial
radiation, conversant with series and degree, with effects and ends,
skilful to discriminate power from form, essence from accident, and
opening, by its terminology and definition, high roads into nature,
had trained a race of athletic philosophers. Harvey had shown the
circulation of the blood; Gilbert had shown that the earth was a
magnet; Descartes, taught by Gilbert's magnet, with its vortex, spiral
and polarity, had filled Europe with the leading thought of vortical
motion, as the secret of nature. Newton, in the year in which
Swedenborg was born, published the "Principia," and established the
universal gravity. Malpighi,*(19) following the high doctrines of
Hippocrates, Leucippus*(20) and Lucretius, had given emphasis to the
dogma that nature works in leasts,- "tota in minimis existit
natura." Unrivalled dissectors, Swammerdam, Leuwenhoek, Winslow,
Eustachius, Heister, Vesalius, Boerhaave,*(21) had left nothing for
scalpel or microscope to reveal in human or comparative anatomy:
Linnaeus, his contemporary, was affirming, in his beautiful science,
that "Nature is always like herself"; and, lastly, the nobility of
method, the largest application of principles, had been exhibited by
Leibnitz*(22) and Christian Wolff, in cosmology; whilst Locke and
Grotius had drawn the moral argument. What was left for a genius of
the largest calibre but to go over their ground and verify and
unite? It is easy to see, in these minds, the origin of Swedenborg's
studies, and the suggestion of his problems. He had a capacity to
entertain and vivify these volumes of thought. Yet the proximity of
these geniuses, one or other of whom had introduced all his leading
ideas, makes Swedenborg another example of the difficulty, even in a
highly fertile genius, of proving originality, the first birth and
annunciation of one of the laws of nature.

  He named his favorite views the doctrine of Forms, the doctrine of
Series and Degrees, the doctrine of Influx, the doctrine of
Correspondence. His statement of these doctrines deserves to be
studied in his books. Not every man can read them, but they will
reward him who can. His theologic works are valuable to illustrate
these. His writings would be a sufficient library to a lonely and
athletic student; and the "Economy of the Animal Kingdom" is one of
those books which, by the sustained dignity of thinking, is an honor
to the human race. He had studied spars and metals to some purpose.
His varied and solid knowledge makes his style lustrous with points
and shooting spiculae of thought, and resembling one of those winter
mornings when the air sparkles with crystals. The grandeur of the
topics makes the grandeur of the style. He was apt for cosmology,
because of that native perception of identity which made mere size
of no account to him. In the atom of magnetic iron he saw the
quality which would generate the spiral motion of sun and planet.

  The thoughts in which he lived were, the universality of each law in
nature; the Platonic doctrine of the scale or degrees; the version
or conversion of each into other, and so the correspondence of all the
parts; the fine secret that little explains large, and large,
little; the centrality of man in nature, and the connection that
subsists throughout all things: he saw that the human body was
strictly universal, or an instrument through which the soul feeds
and is fed by the whole of matter; so that he held, in exact
antagonism to the skeptics, that "the wiser a man is, the more will he
be a worshipper of the Deity." In short, he was a believer in the
Identity-philosophy, which he held not idly, as the dreamers of Berlin
or Boston, but which he experimented with and established through
years of labor, with the heart and strength of the rudest Viking
that his rough Sweden ever sent to battle.

  This theory dates from the oldest philosophers, and derives
perhaps its best illustration from the newest. It is this, that Nature
iterates her means perpetually on successive planes. In the old
aphorism, nature is always self-similar. In the plant, the eye or
germinative point opens to a leaf, then to another leaf, with a
power of transforming the leaf into radicle, stamen, pistil, petal,
bract, sepal, or seed. The whole art of the plant is still to repeat
leaf on leaf without end, the more or less of heat, light, moisture
and food determining the form it shall assume. In the animal, nature
makes a vertebra, or a spine of vertebrae, and helps herself still
by a new spine, with a limited power of modifying its form,- spine
on spine, to the end of the world. A poetic anatomist, in our own day,
teaches that a snake, being a horizontal line, and man, being an erect
line, constitute a right angle; and between the lines of this mystical
quadrant all animated beings find their place: and he assumes the
hair-worm, the span-worm, or the snake, as the type or prediction of
the spine. Manifestly, at the end of the spine, Nature puts out
smaller spines, as arms; at the end of the arms, new spines, as hands;
at the other end, she repeats the process, as legs and feet. At the
top of the column she puts out another spine, which doubles or loops
itself over, as a span-worm, into a ball, and forms the skull, with
extremities again: the hands being now the upper jaw, the feet the
lower jaw, the fingers and toes being represented this time by upper
and lower teeth. This new spine is destined to high uses. It is a
new man on the shoulders of the last. It can almost shed its trunk and
manage to live alone, according to the Platonic idea in the Timaeus.
Within it, on a higher plane, all that was done in the trunk repeats
itself. Nature recites her lesson once more in a higher mood. The mind
is a finer body, and resumes its functions of feeding, digesting,
absorbing, excluding and generating, in a new and ethereal element.
Here in the brain is all the process of alimentation repeated, in
the acquiring, comparing, digesting and assimilating of experience.
Here again is the mystery of generation repeated. In the brain are
male and female faculties; here is marriage, here is fruit. And
there is no limit to this ascending scale, but series on series. Every
thing, at the end of one use, is taken up into the next, each series
punctually repeating every organ and process of the last. We are
adapted to infinity. We are hard to please, and love nothing which
ends; and in nature is no end, but every thing at the end of one use
is lifted into a superior, and the ascent of these things climbs
into daemonic and celestial natures. Creative force, like a musical
composer, goes on unweariedly repeating a simple air or theme, now
high, now low, in solo, in chorus, ten thousand times reverberated,
till it fills earth and heaven with the chant.

  Gravitation, as explained by Newton, is good, but grander when we
find chemistry only an extension of the law of masses into
particles, and that the atomic theory shows the action of chemistry to
be mechanical also. Metaphysics shows us a sort of gravitation
operative also in the mental phenomena; and the terrible tabulation of
the French statists brings every piece of whim and humor to be
reducible also to exact numerical ratios. If one man in twenty
thousand, or in thirty thousand, eats shoes or marries his
grandmother, then in every twenty thousand or thirty thousand is found
one man who eats shoes or marries his grandmother. What we call
gravitation, and fancy ultimate, is one fork of a mightier stream
for which we have yet no name. Astronomy is excellent; but it must
come up into life to have its full value, and not remain there in
globes and spaces. The globule of blood gyrates around its own axis in
the human veins, as the planet in the sky; and the circles of
intellect relate to those of the heavens. Each law of nature has the
like universality; eating, sleep or hybernation, rotation, generation,
metamorphosis, vortical motion, which is seen in eggs as in planets.
These grand rhymes or returns in nature,- the dear, best-known face
startling us at every turn, under a mask so unexpected that we think
it the face of a stranger, and carrying up the semblance into divine
forms,- delighted the prophetic eye of Swedenborg; and he must be
reckoned a leader in that revolution, which, by giving to science an
idea, has given to an aimless accumulation of experiments, guidance
and form and a beating heart.

  I own with some regret that his printed works amount to about
fifty stout octavos, his scientific works being about half of the
whole number; and it appears that a mass of manuscript still
unedited remains in the royal library at Stockholm. The scientific
works have just now been translated into English, in an excellent
edition.

  Swedenborg printed these scientific books in the ten years from 1734
to 1744, and they remained from that time neglected; and now, after
their century is complete, he has at last found a pupil in Mr.
Wilkinson, in London, a philosophic critic, with a coequal vigor of
understanding and imagination comparable only to Lord Bacon's, who has
restored his master's buried books to the day, and transferred them,
with every advantage, from their forgotten Latin into English, to go
round the world in our commercial and conquering tongue. This
startling reappearance of Swedenborg, after a hundred years, in his
pupil, is not the least remarkable fact in his history. Aided it is
said by the munificence of Mr. Clissold, and also by his literary
skill, this piece of poetic justice is done. The admirable preliminary
discourses with which Mr. Wilkinson has enriched these volumes,
throw all the contemporary philosophy of England into shade, and leave
me nothing to say on their proper grounds.

  The "Animal Kingdom" is a book of wonderful merits. It was written
with the highest end,- to put science and the soul, long estranged
from each other, at one again. It was an anatomist's account of the
human body, in the highest style of poetry. Nothing can exceed the
bold and brilliant treatment of a subject usually so dry and
repulsive. He saw nature "wreathing through an everlasting spiral,
with wheels that never dry, on axles that never creak," and
sometimes sought "to uncover those secret recesses where Nature is
sitting at the fires in the depths of her laboratory"; whilst the
picture comes recommended by the hard fidelity with which it is
based on practical anatomy. It is remarkable that this sublime
genius decides peremptorily for the analytic, against the synthetic
method; and, in a book whose genius is a daring poetic synthesis,
claims to confine himself to a rigid experience.

  He knows, if he only, the flowing of nature, and how wise was that
old answer of Amasis*(23) to him who bade him drink up the sea,- "Yes,
willingly, if you will stop the rivers that flow in." Few knew as much
about nature and her subtle manners, or expressed more subtly her
goings. He thought as large a demand is made on our faith by nature,
as by miracles. "He noted that in her proceeding from first principles
through her several subordinations, there was no state through which
she did not pass, as if her path lay through all things." "For as
often as she betakes herself upward from visible phenomena, or, in
other words, withdraws herself inward, she instantly as it were
disappears, while no one knows what has become of her, or whither
she is gone: so that it is necessary to take science as a guide in
pursuing her steps."

  The pursuing the inquiry under the light of an end or final cause
gives wonderful animation, a sort of personality to the whole writing.
This book announces his favorite dogmas. The ancient doctrine of
Hippocrates, that the brain is a gland; and of Leucippus, that the
atom may be known by the mass; or, in Plato, the macrocosm by the
microcosm; and, in the verses of Lucretius,-

    Ossa videlicet e pauxillis atque minutis

    Ossibus sic et de pauxillis atque minutis

    Visceribus viscus gigni, sanguenque creari

    Sanguinis inter se multis coeuntibus guttis;

    Ex aurique putat micis consistere posse

    Aurum, et de terris terram concrescere parvis;

    Ignibus ex igneis, humorem humoribus esse.

   "The principle of all things, entrails made

    Of smallest entrails; bone, of smallest bone;

    Blood, of small sanguine drops reduced to one;

    Gold, of small grains; earth, of small sands compacted;

    Small drops to water, sparks to fire contracted";

and which Malpighi had summed in his maxim that "nature exists
entire in leasts,"- is a favorite thought of Swedenborg. "It is a
constant law of the organic body that large, compound, or visible
forms exist and subsist from smaller, simpler and ultimately from
invisible forms, which act similarly to the larger ones, but more
perfectly and more universally; and the least forms so perfectly and
universally as to involve an idea representative of their entire
universe." The unities of each organ are so many little organs,
homogeneous with their compound: the unities of the tongue are
little tongues; those of the stomach, little stomachs; those of the
heart are little hearts. This fruitful idea furnishes a key to every
secret. What was too small for the eye to detect was read by the
aggregates; what was too large, by the units. There is no end to his
application of the thought. "Hunger is an aggregate of very many
little hungers, or losses of blood by the little veins all over the
body." It is a key to his theology also. "Man is a kind of very minute
heaven, corresponding to the world of spirits and to heaven. Every
particular idea of man, and every affection, yea, every smallest
part of his affection, is an image and effigy of him. A spirit may
be known from only a single thought. God is the grand man."

  The hardihood and thoroughness of his study of nature required a
theory of forms also. "Forms ascend in order from the lowest to the
highest. The lowest form is angular, or the terrestrial and corporeal.
The second and next higher form is the circular, which is also
called the perpetual-angular, because the circumference of a circle is
a perpetual angle. The form above this is the spiral, parent and
measure of circular forms: its diameters are not rectilinear, but
variously circular, and have a spherical surface for centre; therefore
it is called the perpetual-circular. The form above this is the
vortical, or perpetual-spiral: next, the perpetual-vortical, or
celestial: last, the perpetual-celestial, or spiritual."

  Was it strange that a genius so bold should take the last step also,
should conceive that he might attain the science of all sciences, to
unlock the meaning of the world? In the first volume of the "Animal
Kingdom," he broaches the subject in a remarkable note:- "In our
doctrine of Representations and Correspondences we shall treat of both
these symbolical and typical resemblances, and of the astonishing
things which occur, I will not say in the living body only, but
throughout nature, and which correspond so entirely to supreme and
spiritual things that one would swear that the physical world was
purely symbolical of the spiritual world; insomuch that if we choose
to express any natural truth in physical and definite vocal terms, and
to convert these terms only into the corresponding and spiritual
terms, we shall by this means elicit a spiritual truth or
theological dogma, in place of the physical truth or precept: although
no mortal would have predicted that any thing of the kind could
possibly arise by bare literal transposition; inasmuch as the one
precept, considered separately from the other, appears to have
absolutely no relation to it. I intend hereafter to communicate a
number of examples of such correspondences, together with a vocabulary
containing the terms of spiritual things, as well as of the physical
things for which they are to be substituted. This symbolism pervades
the living body."

  The fact thus explicitly stated is implied in all poetry, in
allegory, in fable, in the use of emblems and in the structure of
language. Plato knew it, as is evident from his twice bisected line in
the sixth book of the Republic. Lord Bacon had found that truth and
nature differed only as seal and print; and he instanced some physical
propositions, with their translation into a moral or political
sense. Behmen, and all mystics, imply this law in their dark
riddle-writing. The poets, in as far as they are poets, use it; but it
is known to them only as the magnet was known for ages, as a toy.
Swedenborg first put the fact into a detached and scientific
statement, because it was habitually present to him, and never not
seen. It was involved, as we explained already, in the doctrine of
identity and iteration, because the mental series exactly tallies with
the material series. It required an insight that could rank things
in order and series; or rather it required such rightness of
position that the poles of the eye should coincide with the axis of
the world. The earth had fed its mankind through five or six
millenniums, and they had sciences, religions, philosophies, and yet
had failed to see the correspondence of meaning between every part and
every other part. And, down to this hour, literature has no book in
which the symbolism of things is scientifically opened. One would
say that as soon as men had the first hint that every sensible
object,- animal, rock, river, air,- nay, space and time, subsists
not for itself, nor finally to a material end, but as a
picture-language to tell another story of beings and duties, other
science would be put by, and a science of such grand presage would
absorb all faculties: that each man would ask of all objects what they
mean: Why does the horizon hold me fast, with my joy and grief, in
this centre? Why hear I the same sense from countless differing
voices, and read one never quite expressed fact in endless
picture-language? Yet whether it be that these things will not be
intellectually learned, or that many centuries must elaborate and
compose so rare and opulent a soul,- there is no comet,
rock-stratum, fossil, fish, quadruped, spider, or fungus, that, for
itself, does not interest more scholars and classifiers than the
meaning and upshot of the frame of things.

  But Swedenborg was not content with the culinary use of the world.
In his fifty-fourth year these thoughts held him fast, and his
profound mind admitted the perilous opinion, too frequent in religious
history, that he was an abnormal person, to whom was granted the
privilege of conversing with angels and spirits; and this ecstasy
connected itself with just this office of explaining the moral
import of the sensible world. To a right perception, at once broad and
minute, of the order of nature, he added the comprehension of the
moral laws in their widest social aspects; but whatever he saw,
through some excessive determination to form in his constitution, he
saw not abstractly, but in pictures, heard it in dialogues,
constructed it in events. When he attempted to announce the law most
sanely, he was forced to couch it in parable.

  Modern psychology offers no similar example of a deranged balance.
The principal powers continued to maintain a healthy action, and to
a reader who can make due allowance in the report for the reporter's
peculiarities, the results are still instructive, and a more
striking testimony to the sublime laws he announced than any that
balanced dulness could afford. He attempts to give some account of the
modus of the new state, affirming that "his presence in the
spiritual world is attended with a certain separation, but only as
to the intellectual part of his mind, not as to the will part"; and he
affirms that "he sees, with the internal sight, the things that are in
another life, more clearly than he sees the things which are here in
the world."

  Having adopted the belief that certain books of the Old and New
Testaments were exact allegories, or written in the angelic and
ecstatic mode, he employed his remaining years in extricating from the
literal, the universal sense. He had borrowed from Plato the fine
fable*(24) of "a most ancient people, men better than we and
dwelling nigher to the gods"; and Swedenborg added that they used
the earth symbolically; that these, when they saw terrestrial objects,
did not think at all about them, but only about those which they
signified. The correspondence between thoughts and things henceforward
occupied him. "The very organic form resembles the end inscribed on
it." A man is in general and in particular an organized justice or
injustice, selfishness or gratitude. And the cause of this harmony
he assigned in the Arcana: "The reason why all and single things, in
the heavens and on earth, are representative, is because they exist
from an influx of the Lord, through heaven." This design of exhibiting
such correspondences, which, if adequately executed, would be the poem
of the world, in which all history and science would play an essential
part, was narrowed and defeated by the exclusively theologic direction
which his inquiries took. His perception of nature is not human and
universal, but is mystical and Hebraic. He fastens each natural object
to a theologic notion;- a horse signifies carnal understanding; a
tree, perception; the moon, faith; a cat means this; an ostrich
that; an artichoke this other;- and poorly tethers every symbol to a
several ecclesiastic sense. The slippery Proteus is not so easily
caught. In nature, each individual symbol plays innumerable parts,
as each particle of matter circulates in turn through every system.
The central identity enables any one symbol to express successively
all the qualities and shades of real being. In the transmission of the
heavenly waters, every hose fits every hydrant. Nature avenges herself
speedily on the hard pedantry that would chain her waves. She is no
literalist. Every thing must be taken genially, and we must be at
the top of our condition to understand any thing rightly.

  His theological bias thus fatally narrowed his interpretation of
nature, and the dictionary of symbols is yet to be written. But the
interpreter whom mankind must still expect, will find no predecessor
who has approached so near to the true problem.

  Swedenborg styles himself in the title-page of his books, "Servant
of the Lord Jesus Christ"; and by force of intellect, and in effect,
he is the last Father in the Church, and is not likely to have a
successor. No wonder that his depth of ethical wisdom should give
him influence as a teacher. To the withered traditional church,
yielding dry catechisms, he let in nature again, and the worshipper,
escaping from the vestry of verbs and texts, is surprised to find
himself a party to the whole of his religion. His religion thinks
for him and is of universal application. He turns it on every side; it
fits every part of life, interprets and dignifies every
circumstance. Instead of a religion which visited him diplomatically
three or four times,- when he was born, when he married, when he
fell sick and when he died, and, for the rest, never interfered with
him,- here was a teaching which accompanied him all day, accompanied
him even into sleep and dreams; into his thinking, and showed him
through what a long ancestry his thoughts descend; into society, and
showed by what affinities he was girt to his equals and his
counterparts; into natural objects, and showed their origin and
meaning, what are friendly, and what are hurtful; and opened the
future world by indicating the continuity of the same laws. His
disciples allege that their intellect is invigorated by the study of
his books.

  There is no such problem for criticism as his theological
writings, their merits are so commanding, yet such grave deductions
must be made. Their immense and sandy diffuseness is like the
prairie or the desert, and their incongruities are like the last
deliration. He is superfluously explanatory, and his feeling of the
ignorance of men, strangely exaggerated. Men take truths of this
nature very fast. Yet he abounds in assertions, he is a rich
discoverer, and of things which most import us to know. His thought
dwells in essential resemblances, like the resemblance of a house to
the man who built it. He saw things in their law, in likeness of
function, not of structure. There is an invariable method and order in
his delivery of his truth, the habitual proceeding of the mind from
inmost to outmost. What earnestness and weightiness,- his eye never
roving, without one swell of vanity, or one look to self in any common
form of literary pride! a theoretic or speculative man, but whom no
practical man in the universe could affect to scorn. Plato is a
gownsman; his garment, though of purple, and almost sky-woven, is an
academic robe and hinders action with its voluminous folds. But this
mystic is awful to Caesar. Lycurgus himself would bow.

  The moral insight of Swedenborg, the correction of popular errors,
the announcement of ethical laws, take him out of comparison with
any other modern writer and entitle him to a place, vacant for some
ages, among the lawgivers of mankind. That slow but commanding
influence which he has acquired, like that of other religious
geniuses, must be excessive also, and have its tides, before it
subsides into a permanent amount. Of course what is real and universal
cannot be confined to the circle of those who sympathize strictly with
his genius, but will pass forth into the common stock of wise and just
thinking. The world has a sure chemistry, by which it extracts what is
excellent in its children and lets fall the infirmities and
limitations of the grandest mind.

  That metempsychosis which is familiar in the old mythology of the
Greeks, collected in Ovid and in the Indian Transmigration, and is
there objective, or really takes place in bodies by alien will,- in
Swedenborg's mind has a more philosophic character. It is
subjective, or depends entirely upon the thought of the person. All
things in the universe arrange themselves to each person anew,
according to his ruling love. Man is such as his affection and thought
are. Man is man by virtue of willing, not by virtue of knowing and
understanding. As he is, so he sees. The marriages of the world are
broken up. Interiors associate all in the spiritual world. Whatever
the angels looked upon was to them celestial. Each Satan appears to
himself a man; to those as bad as he, a comely man; to the purified, a
heap of carrion. Nothing can resist states: every thing gravitates:
like will to like: what we call poetic justice takes effect on the
spot. We have come into a world which is a living poem. Every thing is
as I am. Bird and beast is not bird and beast, but emanation and
effluvia of the minds and wills of men there present. Every one
makes his own house and state. The ghosts are tormented with the
fear of death and cannot remember that they have died. They who are in
evil and falsehood are afraid of all others. Such as have deprived
themselves of charity, wander and flee: the societies which they
approach discover their quality and drive them away. The covetous seem
to themselves to be abiding in cells where their money is deposited,
and these to be infested with mice. They who place merit in good works
seem to themselves to cut wood. "I asked such, if they were not
wearied? They replied, that they have not yet done work enough to
merit heaven."

  He delivers golden sayings which express with singular beauty the
ethical laws; as when he uttered that famed sentence, that "In
heaven the angels are advancing continually to the springtime of their
youth, so that the oldest angel appears the youngest": "The more
angels, the more room": "The perfection of man is the love of use":
"Man, in his perfect form, is heaven": "What is from Him, is Him":
"Ends always ascend as nature descends." And the truly poetic
account of the writing in the inmost heaven, which, as it consists
of inflexions according to the form of heaven, can be read without
instruction. He almost justifies his claim to preternatural vision, by
strange insights of the structure of the human body and mind. "It is
never permitted to any one, in heaven, to stand behind another and
look at the back of his head; for then the influx which is from the
Lord is disturbed." The angels, from the sound of the voice, know a
man's love; from the articulation of the sound, his wisdom; and from
the sense of the words, his science.

  In the "Conjugal Love," he has unfolded the science of marriage.
Of this book one would say that with the highest elements it has
failed of success. It came near to be the Hymn of Love, which Plato
attempted in the "Banquet"; the love, which, Dante says,
Casella*(25) sang among the angels in Paradise; and which, as
rightly celebrated, in its genesis, fruition and effect, might well
entrance the souls, as it would lay open the genesis of all
institutions, customs and manners. The book had been grand if the
Hebraism had been omitted and the law stated without Gothicism, as
ethics, and with that scope for ascension of state which the nature of
things requires. It is a fine Platonic development of the science of
marriage; teaching that sex is universal, and not local; virility in
the male qualifying every organ, act, and thought; and the feminine in
woman. Therefore in the real or spiritual world the nuptial union is
not momentary, but incessant and total; and chastity not a local,
but a universal virtue; unchastity being discovered as much in the
trading, or planting, or speaking, or philosophizing, as in
generation; and that, though the virgins he saw in heaven were
beautiful, the wives were incomparably more beautiful, and went on
increasing in beauty evermore.

  Yet Swedenborg, after his mode, pinned his theory to a temporary
form. He exaggerates the circumstance of marriage; and though he finds
false marriages on earth, fancies a wiser choice in heaven. But of
progressive souls, all loves and friendships are momentary. Do you
love me? means, Do you see the same truth? If you do, we are happy
with the same happiness: but presently one of us passes into the
perception of new truth;- we are divorced, and no tension in nature
can hold us to each other. I know how delicious is this cup of
love,- I existing for you, you existing for me; but it is a child's
clinging to his toy; an attempt to eternize the fireside and nuptial
chamber; to keep the picture-alphabet through which our first
lessons are prettily conveyed. The Eden of God is bare and grand: like
the out-door landscape remembered from the evening fireside, it
seems cold and desolate whilst you cower over the coals, but once
abroad again, we pity those who can forego the magnificence of
nature for candle-light and cards. Perhaps the true subject of the
"Conjugal Love" is Conversation whose laws are profoundly set forth.
It is false, if literally applied to marriage. For God is the bride or
bridegroom of the soul. Heaven is not the pairing of two, but the
communion of all souls. We meet, and dwell an instant under the temple
of one thought, and part, as though we parted not, to join another
thought in other fellowships of joy. So far from there being
anything divine in the low and proprietary sense of Do you love me? it
is only when you leave and lose me by casting yourself on a
sentiment which is higher than both of us, that I draw near and find
myself at your side; and I am repelled if you fix your eye on me and
demand love. In fact, in the spiritual world we change sexes every
moment. You love the worth in me; then I am your husband: but it is
not me, but the worth, that fixes the love; and that worth is a drop
of the ocean of worth that is beyond me. Meantime I adore the
greater worth in another, and so become his wife. He aspires to a
higher worth in another spirit, and is wife or receiver of that
influence.

  Whether from a self-inquisitorial habit that he grew into from
jealousy of the sins to which men of thought are liable, he has
acquired, in disentangling and demonstrating that particular form of
moral disease, an acumen which no conscience can resist. I refer to
his feeling of the profanation of thinking to what is good, "from
scientifics." "To reason about faith, is to doubt and deny." He was
painfully alive to the difference between knowing and doing, and
this sensibility is incessantly expressed. Philosophers are,
therefore, vipers, cockatrices, asps, hemorrhoids, presters, and
flying serpents; literary men are conjurors and charlatans.

  But this topic suggests a sad afterthought, that here we find the
seat of his own pain. Possibly Swedenborg paid the penalty of
introverted faculties. Success, or a fortunate genius, seems to depend
on a happy adjustment of heart and brain; on a due proportion, hard to
hit, of moral and mental power, which perhaps obeys the law of those
chemical ratios which make a proportion in volumes necessary to
combination, as when gases will combine in certain fixed rates, but
not at any rate. It is hard to carry a full cup; and this man,
profusely endowed in heart and mind, early fell into dangerous discord
with himself. In his Animal Kingdom he surprised us by declaring
that he loved analysis, and not synthesis; and now, after his fiftieth
year, he falls into jealousy of his intellect; and though aware that
truth is not solitary nor is goodness solitary, but both must ever mix
and marry, he makes war on his mind, takes the part of the
conscience against it, and, on all occasions, traduces and
blasphemes it. The violence is instantly avenged. Beauty is disgraced,
love is unlovely, when truth, the half part of heaven, is denied, as
much as when a bitterness in men of talent leads to satire and
destroys the judgment. He is wise, but wise in his own despite.
There is an air of infinite grief and the sound of wailing all over
and through this lurid universe. A vampyre sits in the seat of the
prophet and turns with gloomy appetite to the images of pain.
Indeed, a bird does not more readily weave its nest, or a mole bore
into the ground, than this seer of the souls substructs a new hell and
pit, each more abominable than the last, round every new crew of
offenders. He was let down through a column that seemed of brass,
but it was formed of angelic spirits, that he might descend safely
amongst the unhappy, and witness the vastation of souls and hear
there, for a long continuance, their lamentations: he saw their
tormentors, who increase and strain pangs to infinity; he saw the hell
of the jugglers, the hell of the assassins, the hell of the
lascivious; the hell of robbers, who kill and boil men; the infernal
tun of the deceitful; the excrementitious hells; the hell of the
revengeful, whose faces resembled a round, broad cake, and their
arms rotate like a wheel. Except Rabelais and Dean Swift nobody ever
had such science of filth and corruption.

  These books should be used with caution. It is dangerous to
sculpture these evanescing images of thought. True in transition, they
become false if fixed. It requires, for his just apprehension,
almost a genius equal to his own. But when his visions become the
stereotyped language of multitudes of persons of all degrees of age
and capacity, they are perverted. The wise people of the Greek race
were accustomed to lead the most intelligent and virtuous young men,
as part of their education, through the Eleusinian mysteries, wherein,
with much pomp and graduation, the highest truths known to ancient
wisdom were taught. An ardent and contemplative young man, at eighteen
or twenty years, might read once these books of Swedenborg, these
mysteries of love and conscience, and then throw them aside for
ever. Genius is ever haunted by similar dreams, when the hells and the
heavens are opened to it. But these pictures are to be held as
mystical, that is, as a quite arbitrary and accidental picture of
the truth,- not as the truth. Any other symbol would be as good;
then this is safely seen.

  Swedenborg's system of the world wants central spontaneity; it is
dynamic, not vital, and lacks power to generate life. There is no
individual in it. The universe is a gigantic crystal, all whose
atoms and laminae lie in uninterrupted order and with unbroken
unity, but cold and still. What seems an individual and a will, is
none. There is an immense chain of intermediation, extending from
centre to extremes, which bereaves every agency of all freedom and
character. The universe, in his poem, suffers under a magnetic
sleep, and only reflects the mind of the magnetizer. Every thought
comes into each mind by influence from a society of spirits that
surround it, and into these from a higher society, and so on. All
his types mean the same few things. All his figures speak one
speech. All his interlocutors Swedenborgize. Be they who they may,
to this complexion must they come at last. This Charon ferries them
all over in his boat; kings, counsellors, cavaliers, doctors, Sir
Isaac Newton, Sir Hans Sloane, King George II, Mahomet, or whomsoever,
and all gather one grimness of hue and style. Only when Cicero comes
by, our gentle seer sticks a little at saying he talked with Cicero,
and with a touch of human relenting remarks, "one whom it was given me
to believe was Cicero"; and when the soi disant Roman opens his mouth,
Rome and eloquence have ebbed away,- it is plain theologic
Swedenborg like the rest. His heavens and hells are dull; fault of
want of individualism. The thousand-fold relation of men is not there.
The interest that attaches in nature to each man, because he is
right by his wrong, and wrong by his right; because he defies all
dogmatizing and classification, so many allowances and contingencies
and futurities are to be taken into account; strong by his vices,
often paralyzed by his virtues;- sinks into entire sympathy with his
society. This want reacts to the centre of the system. Though the
agency of "the Lord" is in every line referred to by name, it never
becomes alive. There is no lustre in that eye which gazes from the
centre and which should vivify the immense dependency of beings.

  The vice of Swedenborg's mind is its theological determination.
Nothing with him has the liberality of universal wisdom, but we are
always in a church. That Hebrew muse, which taught the lore of right
and wrong to men, had the same excess of influence for him it has
had for the nations. The mode, as well as the essence, was sacred.
Palestine is ever the more valuable as a chapter in universal history,
and ever the less an available element in education. The genius of
Swedenborg, largest of all modern souls in this department of thought,
wasted itself in the endeavor to reanimate and conserve what had
already arrived at its natural term, and, in the great secular
Providence, was retiring from its prominence, before Western modes
of thought and expression. Swedenborg and Behmen both failed by
attaching themselves to the Christian symbol, instead of to the
moral sentiment, which carries innumerable christianities, humanities,
divinities, in its bosom.

  The excess of influence shows itself in. the incongruous importation
of a foreign rhetoric. "What have I to do," asks the impatient reader,
"with jasper and sardonyx, beryl and chalcedony; what with arks and
passovers, ephahs and ephods; what with lepers and emerods; what
with heave-offerings and unleavened bread, chariots of fire, dragons
crowned and horned, behemoth and unicorn? Good for Orientals, these
are nothing to me. The more learning you bring to explain them, the
more glaring the impertinence. The more coherent and elaborate the
system, the less I like it. I say, with the Spartan, 'Why do you speak
so much to the purpose, of that which is nothing to the purpose?'*(26)
My learning is such as God gave me in my birth and habit, in the
delight and study of my eyes and not of another man's. Of all
absurdities, this of some foreigner proposing to take away my rhetoric
and substitute his own, and amuse me with pelican and stork, instead
of thrush and robin; palm-trees and shittim-wood, instead of sassafras
and hickory,- seems the most needless."

  Locke said, "God, when he makes the prophet, does not unmake the
man." Swedenborg's history points the remark. The parish disputes in
the Swedish church between the friends and foes of Luther and
Melancthon, concerning "faith alone" and "works alone," intrude
themselves into his speculations upon the economy of the universe, and
of the celestial societies. The Lutheran bishop's son, for whom the
heavens are opened, so that he sees with eyes and in the richest
symbolic forms the awful truth of things, and utters again in his
books, as under a heavenly mandate, the indisputable secrets of
moral nature,- with all these grandeurs resting upon him, remains
the Lutheran bishop's son; his judgments are those of a Swedish
polemic, and his vast enlargements purchased by adamantine
limitations. He carries his controversial memory with him in his
visits to the souls. He is like Michael Angelo, who, in his
frescoes, put the cardinal who had offended him to roast under a
mountain of devils; or like Dante, who avenged, in vindictive
melodies, all his private wrongs; or perhaps still more like
Montaigne's parish priest, who, if a hail-storm passes over the
village, thinks the day of doom is come, and the cannibals already
have got the pip. Swedenborg confounds us not less with the pains of
Melancthon and Luther and Wolfius, and his own books, which he
advertises among the angels.

  Under the same theologic cramp, many of his dogmas are bound. His
cardinal position in morals is that evils should be shunned as sins.
But he does not know what evil is, or what good is, who thinks any
ground remains to be occupied, after saying that evil is to be shunned
as evil. I doubt not he was led by the desire to insert the element of
personality of Deity. But nothing is added. One man, you say, dreads
erysipelas,- show him that this dread is evil: or, one dreads hell,-
show him that dread is evil. He who loves goodness, harbors angels,
reveres reverence and lives with God. The less we have to do with
our sins the better. No man can afford to waste his moments in
compunctions. "That is active duty," say the Hindoos, "which is not
for our bondage; that is knowledge, which is for our liberation: all
other duty is good only unto weariness."

  Another dogma, growing out of this pernicious theologic
limitation, is his Inferno. Swedenborg has devils. Evil, according
to old philosophers, is good in the making. That pure malignity can
exist is the extreme proposition of unbelief. It is not to be
entertained by a rational agent; it is atheism; it is the last
profanation. Euripides rightly said,-

         "Goodness and being in the gods are one;

          He who imputes ill to them makes them none."

  To what a painful perversion had Gothic theology arrived, that
Swedenborg admitted no conversion for evil spirits! But the divine
effort is never relaxed; the carrion in the sun will convert itself to
grass and flowers; and man, though in brothels, or jails, or on
gibbets, is on his way to all that is good and true. Burns, with the
wild humor of his apostrophe to poor "auld Nickie Ben,"

         "O wad ye tak a thought, and mend!"

has the advantage of the vindictive theologian. Every thing is
superficial and perishes but love and truth only. The largest is
always the truest sentiment, and we feel the more generous spirit of
the Indian Vishnu,- "I am the same to all mankind. There is not one
who is worthy of my love or hatred. They who serve me with adoration,-
I am in them, and they in me. If one whose ways are altogether evil
serve me alone, he is as respectable as the just man; he is altogether
well employed; he soon becometh of a virtuous spirit and obtaineth
eternal happiness."

  For the anomalous pretension of Revelations of the other world,-
only his probity and genius can entitle it to any serious regard.
His revelations destroy their credit by running into detail. If a
man say that the Holy Ghost has informed him that the Last judgment
(or the last of the judgments) took place in 1757; or that the
Dutch, in the other world, live in a heaven by themselves, and the
English in a heaven by themselves; I reply that the Spirit which is
holy is reserved, taciturn, and deals in laws. The rumors of ghosts
and hobgoblins gossip and tell fortunes. The teachings of the high
Spirit are abstemious, and, in regard to particulars, negative.
Socrates's Genius did not advise him to act or to find, but if he
purposed to do somewhat not advantageous, it dissuaded him. "What
God is," he said, "I know not; what he is not, I know." The Hindoos
have denominated the Supreme Being, the "Internal Check." The
illuminated Quakers explained their Light, not as somewhat which leads
to any action, but it appears as an obstruction to any thing unfit.
But the right examples are private experiences, which are absolutely
at one on this point. Strictly speaking, Swedenborg's revelation is
a confounding of planes,- a capital offence in so learned a
categorist. This is to carry the law of surface into the plane of
substance, to carry individualism and its fopperies into the realm
of essences and generals,- which is dislocation and chaos.

  The secret of heaven is kept from age to age. No imprudent, no
sociable angel ever dropt an early syllable to answer the longings
of saints, the fears of mortals. We should have listened on our
knees to any favorite, who, by stricter obedience, had brought his
thoughts into parallelism with the celestial currents and could hint
to human ears the scenery and circumstance of the newly parted soul.
But it is certain that it must tally with what is best in nature. It
must not be inferior in tone to the already known works of the
artist who sculptures the globes of the firmament and writes the moral
law. It must be fresher than rainbows, stabler than mountains,
agreeing with flowers, with tides and the rising and setting of
autumnal stars. Melodious poets shall be hoarse as street ballads when
once the penetrating key-note of nature and spirit is sounded,- the
earth-beat, sea-beat, heart-beat, which makes the tune to which the
sun rolls, and the globule of blood, and the sap of trees.

  In this mood we hear the rumor that the seer has arrived, and his
tale is told. But there is no beauty, no heaven: for angels,
goblins. The sad muse loves night and death and the pit. His Inferno
is mesmeric. His spiritual world bears the same relation to the
generosities and joys of truth of which human souls have already
made us cognizant, as a man's bad dreams bear to his ideal life. It is
indeed very like, in its endless power of lurid pictures, to the
phenomena of dreaming, which nightly turns many an honest gentleman,
benevolent but dyspeptic, into a wretch, skulking like a dog about the
outer yards and kennels of creation. When he mounts into the heaven, I
do not hear its language. A man should not tell me that he has
walked among the angels; his proof is that his eloquence makes me one.
Shall the archangels be less majestic and sweet than the figures
that have actually walked the earth? These angels that Swedenborg
paints give us no very high idea of their discipline and culture: they
are all country parsons: their heaven is a fete champetre, an
evangelical picnic, or French distribution of prizes to virtuous
peasants. Strange, scholastic, didactic, passionless, bloodless man,
who denotes classes of souls as a botanist disposes of a carex, and
visits doleful hells as a stratum of chalk or hornblende! He has no
sympathy. He goes up and down the world of men, a modern
Rhadamanthus in gold-headed cane and peruke, and with nonchalance
and the air of a referee, distributes souls. The warm, many-weathered,
passionate-peopled world is to him a grammar of hieroglyphs, or an
emblematic freemason's procession. How different is Jacob Behmen! he
is tremulous with emotion and listens awe-struck, with the gentlest
humanity, to the Teacher whose lessons he conveys; and when he asserts
that, "in some sort, love is greater than God," his heart beats so
high that the thumping against his leathern coat is audible across the
centuries. 'Tis a great difference. Behmen is healthily and
beautifully wise, notwithstanding the mystical narrowness and
incommunicableness. Swedenborg is disagreeably wise, and with all
his accumulated gifts, paralyzes and repels.

  It is the best sign of a great nature that it opens a foreground,
and, like the breath of morning landscapes, invites us onward.
Swedenborg is retrospective, nor can we divest him of his mattock
and shroud. Some minds are for ever restrained from descending into
nature; others are for ever prevented from ascending out of it. With a
force of many men, he could never break the umbilical cord which
held him to nature, and he did not rise to the platform of pure
genius.

  It is remarkable that this man, who, by his perception of symbols,
saw the poetic construction of things and the primary relation of mind
to matter, remained entirely devoid of the whole apparatus of poetic
expression, which that perception creates. He knew the grammar and
rudiments of the Mother-Tongue,- how could he not read off one
strain into music? Was he like Saadi, who, in his vision, designed
to fill his lap with the celestial flowers, as presents for his
friends; but the fragrance of the roses so intoxicated him that the
skirt dropped from his hands? or is reporting a breach of the
manners of that heavenly society? or was it that he saw the vision
intellectually, and hence that chiding of the intellectual that
pervades his books? Be it as it may, his books have no melody, no
emotion, no humor, no relief to the dead prosaic level. In his profuse
and accurate imagery is no pleasure, for there is no beauty. We wander
forlorn in a lack-lustre landscape. No bird ever sang in all these
gardens of the dead. The entire want of poetry in so transcendent a
mind betokens the disease, and like a hoarse voice in a beautiful
person, is a kind of warning. I think, sometimes, he will not be
read longer. His great name will turn a sentence. His books have
become a monument. His laurel so largely mixed with cypress, a
charnel-breath so mingles with the temple incense, that boys and maids
will shun the spot.

  Yet in this immolation of genius and fame at the shrine of
conscience, is a merit sublime beyond praise. He lived to purpose:
he gave a verdict. He elected goodness as the clue to which the soul
must cling in all this labyrinth of nature. Many opinions conflict
as to the true centre. In the shipwreck, some cling to running
rigging, some to cask and barrel, some to spars, some to mast; the
pilot chooses with science,- I plant myself here; all will sink before
this; "he comes to land who sails with me." Do not rely on heavenly
favor, or on compassion to folly, or on prudence, on common sense, the
old usage and main chance of men: nothing can keep you,- not fate, nor
health, nor admirable intellect; none can keep you, but rectitude
only, rectitude for ever and ever! And with a tenacity that never
swerved in all his studies, inventions, dreams, he adheres to this
brave choice. I think of him as of some transmigrating votary of
Indian legend, who says "Though I be dog, or jackal, or pismire, in
the last rudiments of nature, under what integument or ferocity, I
cleave to right, as the sure ladder that leads up to man and to God."

  Swedenborg has rendered a double service to mankind, which is now
only beginning to be known. By the science of experiment and use, he
made his first steps: he observed and published the laws of nature;
and ascending by just degrees from events to their summits and causes,
he was fired with piety at the harmonies he felt, and abandoned
himself to his joy and worship. This was his first service. If the
glory was too bright for his eyes to bear, if he staggered under the
trance of delight, the more excellent is the spectacle he saw, the
realities of being which beam and blaze through him, and which no
infirmities of the prophet are suffered to obscure; and he renders a
second passive service to men, not less than the first, perhaps, in
the great circle of being,- and, in the retributions of spiritual
nature, not less glorious or less beautiful to himself.
MONTAIGNE

                       MONTAIGNE

                     or, The Skeptic

  EVERY FACT is related on one side to sensation, and on the other
to morals. The game of thought is, on the appearance of one of these
two sides, to find the other: given the upper, to find the under side.
Nothing so thin but has these two faces, and when the observer has
seen the obverse, he turns it over to see the reverse. Life is a
pitching of this penny,- heads or tails. We never tire of this game,
because there is still a slight shudder of astonishment at the
exhibition of the other face, at the contrast of the two faces. A
man is flushed with success, and bethinks himself what this good
luck signifies. He drives his bargain in the street; but it occurs
that he also is bought and sold. He sees the beauty of a human face,
and searches the cause of that beauty, which must be more beautiful.
He builds his fortunes, maintains the laws, cherishes his children;
but he asks himself, Why? and whereto? This head and this tail are
called, in the language of philosophy, Infinite and Finite; Relative
and Absolute; Apparent and Real; and many fine names beside.

  Each man is born with a predisposition to one or the other of
these sides of nature; and it will easily happen that men will be
found devoted to one or the other. One class has the perception of
difference, and is conversant with facts and surfaces, cities and
persons, and the bringing certain things to pass;- the men of talent
and action. Another class have the perception of identity, and are men
of faith and philosophy, men of genius.

  Each of these riders drives too fast. Plotinus believes only in
philosophers; Fenelon, in saints; Pindar and Byron, in poets. Read the
haughty language in which Plato and the Platonists speak of all men
who are not devoted to their own shining abstractions: other men are
rats and mice. The literary class is usually proud and exclusive.
The correspondence of Pope and Swift describes mankind around them
as monsters; and that of Goethe and Schiller, in our own time, is
scarcely more kind.

  It is easy to see how this arrogance comes. The genius is a genius
by the first look he casts on any object. Is his eye creative? Does he
not rest in angles and colors, but beholds the design?- he will
presently undervalue the actual object. In powerful moments, his
thought has dissolved the works of art and nature into their causes,
so that the works appear heavy and faulty. He has a conception of
beauty which the sculptor cannot embody. Picture, statue, temple,
railroad, steam-engine, existed first in an artist's mind, without
flaw, mistake, or friction, which impair the executed models. So did
the Church, the State, college, court, social circle, and all the
institutions. It is not strange that these men, remembering what
they have seen and hoped of ideas, should affirm disdainfully the
superiority of ideas. Having at some time seen that the happy soul
will carry all the arts in power, they say, Why cumber ourselves
with superfluous realizations? and like dreaming beggars they assume
to speak and act as if these values were already substantiated.

  On the other part, the men of toil and trade and luxury,- the animal
world, including the animal in the philosopher and poet also, and
the practical world, including the painful drudgeries which are
never excused to philosopher or poet any more than to the rest,- weigh
heavily on the other side. The trade in our streets believes in no
metaphysical causes, thinks nothing of the force which necessitated
traders and a trading planet to exist: no, but sticks to cotton,
sugar, wool and salt. The ward meetings, on election days, are not
softened by any misgiving of the value of these ballotings. Hot life
is streaming in a single direction. To the men of this world, to the
animal strength and spirits, to the men of practical power, whilst
immersed in it, the man of ideas appears out of his reason. They alone
have reason.

  Things always bring their own philosophy with them, that is,
prudence. No man acquires property without acquiring with it a
little arithmetic also. In England, the richest country that ever
existed, property stands for more, compared with personal ability,
than in any other. After dinner, a man believes less, denies more:
verities have lost some charm. After dinner, arithmetic is the only
science: ideas are disturbing, incendiary, follies of young men,
repudiated by the solid portion of society: and a man comes to be
valued by his athletic and animal qualities. Spence relates that Mr.
Pope was with Sir Godfrey Kneller one day, when his nephew, a Guinea
trader, came in. "Nephew," said Sir Godfrey, "you have the honor of
seeing the two greatest men in the world." "I don't know how great men
you may be," said the Guinea man, "but I don't like your looks. I have
often bought a man much better than both of you, all muscles and
bones, for ten guineas." Thus the men of the senses revenge themselves
on the professors and repay scorn for scorn. The first had leaped to
conclusions not yet ripe, and say more than is true; the others make
themselves merry with the philosopher, and weigh man by the pound.
They believe that mustard bites the tongue, that pepper is hot,
friction-matches incendiary, revolvers are to be avoided, and
suspenders hold up pantaloons; that there is much sentiment in a chest
of tea; and a man will be eloquent, if you give him good wine. Are you
tender and scrupulous,- you must eat more mince-pie. They hold that
Luther had milk in him when he said,-

         "Wer nicht liebt Wein, Weiber, Gesang,

          Der bleibt ein Narr sein Leben lang";-

and when he advised a young scholar, perplexed with fore-ordination
and free-will, to get well drunk. "The nerves," says Cabanis, "they
are the man." My neighbor, a jolly farmer, in the tavern bar-room,
thinks that the use of money is sure and speedy spending. For his
part, he says, he puts his down his neck and gets the good of it.

  The inconvenience of this way of thinking is that it runs into
indifferentism and then into disgust. Life is eating us up. We shall
be fables presently. Keep cool: it will be all one a hundred years
hence. Life's well enough, but we shall be glad to get out of it,
and they will all be glad to have us. Why should we fret and drudge?
Our meat will taste to-morrow as it did yesterday, and we may at
last have had enough of it. "Ah," said my languid gentleman at Oxford,
"there's nothing new or true,- and no matter."

  With a little more bitterness, the cynic moans; our life is like
an ass led to market by a bundle of hay being carried before him; he
sees nothing but the bundle of hay. "There is so much trouble in
coming into the world," said Lord Bolingbroke, "and so much more, as
well as meanness, in going out of it, that 'tis hardly worthwhile to
be here at all." I knew a philosopher of this kidney who was
accustomed briefly to sum up his experience of human nature in saying,
"Mankind is a damned rascal":*(27) and the natural corollary is pretty
sure to follow,- "The world lives by humbug, and so will I."

  The abstractionist and the materialist thus mutually exasperating
each other, and the scoffer expressing the worst of materialism, there
arises a third party to occupy the middle ground between these two,
the skeptic, namely. He finds both wrong by being in extremes. He
labors to plant his feet, to be the beam of the balance. He will not
go beyond his card. He sees the one-sidedness of these men of the
street; he will not be a Gibeonite; he stands for the intellectual
faculties, a cool head and whatever serves to keep it cool; no
unadvised industry, no unrewarded self-devotion, no loss of the brains
in toil. Am I an ox, or a dray?- You are both in extremes, he says.
You that will have all solid, and a world of pig-lead, deceive
yourselves grossly. You believe yourselves rooted and grounded on
adamant; and yet, if we uncover the last facts of our knowledge, you
are spinning like bubbles in a river, you know not whither or
whence, and you are bottomed and capped and wrapped in delusions.
Neither will he be betrayed to a book and wrapped in a gown. The
studious class are their own victims; they are thin and pale, their
feet are cold, their heads are hot, the night is without sleep, the
day a fear of interruption,- pallor, squalor, hunger and egotism. If
you come near them and see what conceits they entertain,- they are
abstractionists, and spend their days and nights in dreaming some
dream; in expecting the homage of society to some precious scheme,
built on a truth, but destitute of proportion in its presentment, of
justness in its application, and of all energy of will in the
schemer to embody and vitalize it.

  But I see plainly, he says, that I cannot see. I know that human
strength is not in extremes, but in avoiding extremes. I, at least,
will shun the weakness of philosophizing beyond my depth. What is
the use of pretending to powers we have not? What is the use of
pretending to assurances we have not, respecting the other life? Why
exaggerate the power of virtue? Why be an angel before your time?
These strings, wound up too high, will snap. If there is a wish for
immortality, and no evidence, why not say just that? If there are
conflicting evidences, why not state them? If there is not ground
for a candid thinker to make up his mind, yea or nay,- why not suspend
the judgment? I weary of these dogmatizers. I tire of these hacks of
routine, who deny the dogmas. I neither affirm nor deny. I stand
here to try the case. I am here to consider, skopein, to consider
how it is. I will try to keep the balance true. Of what use to take
the chair and glibly rattle off theories of society, religion and
nature, when I know that practical objections lie in the way,
insurmountable by me and by my mates? Why so talkative in public, when
each of my neighbors can pin me to my seat by arguments I cannot
refute? Why pretend that life is so simple a game, when we know how
subtle and elusive the Proteus*(28) is? Why think to shut up all
things in your narrow coop, when we know there are not one or two
only, but ten, twenty, a thousand things, and unlike? Why fancy that
you have all the truth in your keeping? There is much to say on all
sides.

  Who shall forbid a wise skepticism, seeing that there is no
practical question on which any thing more than an approximate
solution can be had? Is not marriage an open question, when it is
alleged, from the beginning of the world, that such as are in the
institution wish to get out, and such as are out wish to get in? And
the reply of Socrates, to him who asked whether he should choose a
wife, still remains reasonable, that "whether he should choose one
or not, he would repent it." Is not the State a question? All
society is divided in opinion on the subject of the State. Nobody
loves it; great numbers dislike it and suffer conscientious scruples
to allegiance; and the only defence set up, is the fear of doing worse
in disorganizing. Is it otherwise with the Church? Or, to put any of
the questions which touch mankind nearest,- shall the young man aim at
a leading part in law, in polities, in trade? It will not be pretended
that a success in either of these kinds is quite coincident with
what is best and inmost in his mind. Shall he then, cutting the
stays that hold him fast to the social state, put out to sea with no
guidance but his genius? There is much to say on both sides.
Remember the open question between the present order of
"competition" and the friends of "attractive and associated labor."
The generous minds embrace the proposition of labor shared by all;
it is the only honesty; nothing else is safe. It is from the poor
man's hut alone that strength and virtue come: and yet, on the other
side, it is alleged that labor impairs the form and breaks the
spirit of man, and the laborers cry unanimously, "We have no
thoughts." Culture, how indispensable! I cannot forgive you the want
of accomplishments; and yet culture will instantly impair that
chiefest beauty of spontaneousness. Excellent is culture for a savage;
but once let him read in the book, and he is no longer able not to
think of Plutarch's heroes. In short, since true fortitude of
understanding consists "in not letting what we know be embarrassed
by what we do not know," we ought to secure those advantages which
we can command, and not risk them by clutching after the airy and
unattainable. Come, no chimeras! Let us go abroad; let us mix in
affairs; let us learn and get and have and climb. "Men are a sort of
moving plants, and, like trees, receive a great part of their
nourishment from the air. If they keep too much at home, they pine."
Let us have a robust, manly life; let us know what we know, for
certain; what we have, let it be solid and seasonable and our own. A
world in the hand is worth two in the bush. Let us have to do with
real men and women, and not with skipping ghosts.

  This then is the right ground of the skeptic,- this of
consideration, of self-containing; not at all of unbelief; not at
all of universal denying, nor of universal doubting,- doubting even
that he doubts; least of all of scoffing and profligate jeering at all
that is stable and good. These are no more his moods than are those of
religion and philosophy. He is the considerer, the prudent, taking
in sail, counting stock, husbanding his means, believing that a man
has too many enemies than that he can afford to be his own foe; that
we cannot give ourselves too many advantages in this unequal conflict,
with powers so vast and unweariable ranged on one side, and this
little conceited vulnerable popinjay that a man is, bobbing up and
down into every danger, on the other. It is a position taken up for
better defence, as of more safety, and one that can be maintained; and
it is one of more opportunity and range: as, when we build a house,
the rule is to set it not too high nor too low, under the wind, but
out of the dirt.

  The philosophy we want is one of fluxions and mobility. The
Spartan and Stoic schemes are too stark and stiff for our occasion.
A theory of Saint John, and of non-resistance, seems, on the other
hand, too thin and aerial. We want some coat woven of elastic steel,
stout as the first and limber as the second. We want a ship in these
billows we inhabit. An angular, dogmatic house would be rent to
chips and splinters in this storm of many elements. No, it must be
tight, and fit to the form of man, to live at all; as a shell must
dictate the architecture of a house founded on the sea. The soul of
man must be the type of our scheme, just as the body of man is the
type after which a dwelling-house is built. Adaptiveness is the
peculiarity of human nature. We are golden averages, volitant
stabilities, compensated or periodic errors, houses founded on the
sea. The wise skeptic wishes to have a near view of the best game
and the chief players; what is best in the planet; art and nature,
places and events; but mainly men. Every thing that is excellent in
mankind,- a form of grace, an arm of iron, lips of persuasion, a brain
of resources, every one skilful to play and win,- he will see and
judge.

  The terms of admission to this spectacle are, that he have a certain
solid and intelligible way of living of his own; some method of
answering the inevitable needs of human life; proof that he has played
with skill and success; that he has evinced the temper, stoutness
and the range of qualities which, among his contemporaries and
countrymen, entitle him to fellowship and trust. For the secrets of
life are not shown except to sympathy and likeness. Men do not confide
themselves to boys, or coxcombs, or pedants, but to their peers.
Some wise limitation, as the modern phrase is; some condition
between the extremes, and having, itself, a positive quality; some
stark and sufficient man, who is not salt or sugar, but sufficiently
related to the world to do justice to Paris or London, and, at the
same time, a vigorous and original thinker, whom cities can not
overawe, but who uses them,- is the fit person to occupy this ground
of speculation.

  These qualities meet in the character of Montaigne. And yet, since
the personal regard which I entertain for Montaigne may be unduly
great, I will, under the shield of this prince of egotists, offer,
as an apology for electing him as the representative of skepticism,
a word or two to explain how my love began and grew for this admirable
gossip.

  A single odd volume of Cotton's translation of the Essays remained
to me from my father's library, when a boy. It lay long neglected,
until, after many years, when I was newly escaped from college, I read
the book, and procured the remaining volumes. I remember the delight
and wonder in which I lived with it. It seemed to me as if I had
myself written the book, in some former life, so sincerely it spoke to
my thought and experience. It happened, when in Paris, in 1833,
that, in the cemetery of Pere Lachaise, I came to a tomb of Auguste
Collignon, who died in 1830, aged sixty-eight years, and who, said the
monument, "lived to do right, and had formed himself to virtue on
the Essays of Montaigne." Some years later, I became acquainted with
an accomplished English poet, John Sterling; and, in prosecuting my
correspondence, I found that, from a love of Montaigne, he had made
a pilgrimage to his chateau, still standing near Castellan, in
Perigord, and, after two hundred and fifty years, had copied from
the walls of his library the inscriptions which Montaigne had
written there. That Journal of Mr. Sterling's, published in the
Westminster Review, Mr. Hazlitt has reprinted in the Prolegomena to
his edition of the Essays. I heard with pleasure that one of the
newly-discovered autographs of William Shakespeare was in a copy of
Florio's translation of Montaigne. It is the only book which we
certainly know to have been in the poet's library. And, oddly
enough, the duplicate copy of Florio, which the British Museum
purchased with a view of protecting the Shakespeare autograph (as I
was informed in the Museum), turned out to have the autograph of Ben
Jonson in the fly-leaf. Leigh Hunt relates of Lord Byron, that
Montaigne was the only great writer of past times whom he read with
avowed satisfaction. Other coincidences, not needful to be mentioned
here, concurred to make this old Gascon still new and immortal for me.

  In 1571, on the death of his father, Montaigne, then thirty-eight
years old, retired from the practice of law at Bordeaux, and settled
himself on his estate. Though he had been a man of pleasure and
sometimes a courtier, his studious habits now grew on him, and he
loved the compass, staidness and independence of the country
gentleman's life. He took up his economy in good earnest, and made his
farms yield the most. Downright and plain-dealing, and abhorring to be
deceived or to deceive, he was esteemed in the country for his sense
and probity. In the civil wars of the League, which converted every
house into a fort, Montaigne kept his gates open and his house without
defence. All parties freely came and went, his courage and honor being
universally esteemed. The neighboring lords and gentry brought
jewels and papers to him for safekeeping. Gibbon reckons, in these
bigoted times, but two men of liberality in France,- Henry IV and
Montaigne.

  Montaigne is the frankest and honestest of all writers. His French
freedom runs into grossness; but he has anticipated all censure by the
bounty of his own confessions. In his times, books were written to one
sex only, and almost all were written in Latin; so that in a
humorist a certain nakedness of statement was permitted, which our
manners, of a literature addressed equally to both sexes, do not
allow. But though a biblical plainness coupled with a most uncanonical
levity may shut his pages to many sensitive readers, yet the offence
is superficial. He parades it: he makes the most of it: nobody can
think or say worse of him than he does. He pretends to most of the
vices; and, if there be any virtue in him, he says, it got in by
stealth. There is no man, in his opinion, who has not deserved hanging
five or six times; and he pretends no exception in his own behalf.
"Five or six as ridiculous stories," too, he says, "can be told of me,
as of any man living." But, with all this really superfluous
frankness, the opinion of an invincible probity grows into every
reader's mind. "When I the most strictly and religiously confess
myself, I find that the best virtue I have has in it some tincture
of vice; and I, who am as sincere and perfect a lover of virtue of
that stamp as any other whatever, am afraid that Plato, in his
purest virtue, if he had listened and laid his ear close to himself,
would have heard some jarring sound of human mixture; but faint and
remote and only to be perceived by himself."

  Here is an impatience and fastidiousness at color or pretence of any
kind. He has been in courts so long as to have conceived a furious
disgust at appearances; he will indulge himself with a little
cursing and swearing; he will talk with sailors and gipsies, use flash
and street ballads; he has stayed in-doors till he is deadly sick;
he will to the open air, though it rain bullets. He has seen too
much of gentlemen of the long robe, until he wishes for cannibals; and
is so nervous, by factitious life, that he thinks the more barbarous
man is, the better he is. He likes his saddle. You may read
theology, and grammar, and metaphysics elsewhere. Whatever you get
here shall smack of the earth and of real life, sweet, or smart, or
stinging. He makes no hesitation to entertain you with the records
of his disease, and his journey to Italy is quite full of that matter.
He took and kept this position of equilibrium. Over his name he drew
an emblematic pair of scales, and wrote Que scais je? under it. As I
look at his effigy opposite the title-page, I seem to hear him say,
"You may play old Poz, if you will; you may rail and exaggerate,- I
stand here for truth, and will not, for all the states and churches
and revenues and personal reputations of Europe, overstate the dry
fact, as I see it; I will rather mumble and prose about what I
certainly know,- my house and barns; my father, my wife and my
tenants; my old lean bald pate; my knives and forks; what meats I
eat and what drinks I prefer, and a hundred straws just as
ridiculous,- than I will write, with a fine crow-quill, a fine
romance. I like gray days, and autumn and winter weather. I am gray
and autumnal myself, and think an undress and old shoes that do not
pinch my feet, and old friends who do not constrain me, and plain
topics where I do not need to strain myself and pump my brains, the
most suitable. Our condition as men is risky and ticklish enough.
One cannot be sure of himself and his fortune an hour, but he may be
whisked off into some pitiable or ridiculous plight. Why should I
vapor and play the philosopher, instead of ballasting, the best I can,
this dancing balloon? So, at least, I live within compass, keep myself
ready for action, and can shoot the gulf at last with decency. If
there be anything farcical in such a life, the blame is not mine;
let it lie at fate's and nature's door."

  The Essays, therefore, are an entertaining soliloquy on every random
topic that comes into his head; treating every thing without ceremony,
yet with masculine sense. There have been men with deeper insight;
but, one would say, never a man with such abundance of thoughts: he is
never dull, never insincere, and has the genius to make the reader
care for all that he cares for.

  The sincerity and marrow of the man reaches to his sentences. I know
not anywhere the book that seems less written. It is the language of
conversation transferred to a book. Cut these words, and they would
bleed; they are vascular and alive. One has the same pleasure in it
that he feels in listening to the necessary speech of men about
their work, when any unusual circumstance gives momentary importance
to the dialogue. For blacksmiths and teamsters do not trip in their
speech; it is a shower of bullets. It is Cambridge men who correct
themselves and begin again at every half sentence, and, moreover, will
pun, and refine too much, and swerve from the matter to the
expression. Montaigne talks with shrewdness, knows the world and books
and himself, and uses the positive degree; never shrieks, or protests,
or prays: no weakness, no convulsion, no superlative: does not wish to
jump out of his skin, or play any antics, or annihilate space or time,
but is stout and solid; tastes every moment of the day; likes pain
because it makes him feel himself and realize things; as we pinch
ourselves to know that we are awake. He keeps the plain; he rarely
mounts or sinks; likes to feel solid ground and the stones underneath.
His writing has no enthusiasms, no aspiration; contented,
self-respecting and keeping the middle of the road. There is but one
exception,- in his love for Socrates. In speaking of him, for once his
cheek flushes and his style rises to passion.

  Montaigne died of a quinsy, at the age of sixty, in 1592. When he
came to die he caused the mass to be celebrated in his chamber. At the
age of thirty-three, he had been married. "But," he says, "might I
have had my own will, I would not have married Wisdom herself, if
she would have had me: but 'tis to much purpose to evade it, the
common custom and use of life will have it so. Most of my actions
are guided by example, not choice." In the hour of death, he gave
the same weight to custom. Que scais je? What do I know?

  This book of Montaigne the world has endorsed by translating it into
all tongues and printing seventy-five editions of it in Europe; and
that, too, a circulation somewhat chosen, namely among courtiers,
soldiers, princes, men of the world and men of wit and generosity.

  Shall we say that Montaigne has spoken wisely, and given the right
and permanent expression of the human mind, on the conduct of life?

  We are natural believers. Truth, or the connection between cause and
effect, alone interests us. We are persuaded that a thread runs
through all things: all worlds are strung on it, as beads; and men,
and events, and life, come to us only because of that thread: they
pass and repass only that we may know the direction and continuity
of that line. A book or statement which goes to show that there is
no line, but random and chaos, a calamity out of nothing, a prosperity
and no account of it, a hero born from a fool, a fool from a hero,-
dispirits us. Seen or unseen, we believe the tie exists. Talent
makes counterfeit ties; genius finds the real ones. We hearken to
the man of science, because we anticipate the sequence in natural
phenomena which he uncovers. We love whatever affirms, connects,
preserves; and dislike what scatters or pulls down. One man appears
whose nature is to all men's eyes conserving and constructive; his
presence supposes a well-ordered society, agriculture, trade, large
institutions and empire. If these did not exist, they would begin to
exist through his endeavors. Therefore he cheers and comforts men, who
feel all this in him very readily. The nonconformist and the rebel say
all manner of unanswerable things against the existing republic, but
discover to our sense no plan of house or state of their own.
Therefore, though the town and state and way of living, which our
counsellor contemplated, might be a very modest or musty prosperity,
yet men rightly go for him, and reject the reformer so long as he
comes only with axe and crowbar.

  But though we are natural conservers and causationists, and reject a
sour, dumpish unbelief, the skeptical class, which Montaigne
represents, have reason, and every man, at some time, belongs to it.
Every superior mind will pass through this domain of equilibration,- I
should rather say, will know how to avail himself of the checks and
balances in nature, as a natural weapon against the exaggeration and
formalism of bigots and blockheads.

  Skepticism is the attitude assumed by the student in relation to the
particulars which society adores, but which he sees to be reverend
only in their tendency and spirit. The ground occupied by the
skeptic is the vestibule of the temple. Society does not like to
have any breath of question blown on the existing order. But the
interrogation of custom at all points is an inevitable stage in the
growth of every superior mind, and is the evidence of its perception
of the flowing power which remains itself in all changes.

  The superior mind will find itself equally at odds with the evils of
society and with the projects that are offered to relieve them. The
wise skeptic is a bad citizen; no conservative, he sees the
selfishness of property and the drowsiness of institutions. But
neither is he fit to work with any democratic party that ever was
constituted; for parties wish every one committed, and he penetrates
the popular patriotism. His politics are those of the "Soul's
Errand" of Sir Walter Raleigh; or of Krishna, in the Bhagavat,
"There is none who is worthy of my love or hatred"; whilst he
sentences law, physic, divinity, commerce and custom. He is a
reformer; yet he is no better member of the philanthropic association.
It turns out that he is not the champion of the operative, the pauper,
the prisoner, the slave. It stands in his mind that our life in this
world is not of quite so easy interpretation as churches and
schoolbooks say. He does not wish to take ground against these
benevolences, to play the part of devil's attorney, and blazon every
doubt and sneer that darkens the sun for him. But he says, There are
doubts.

  I mean to use the occasion, and celebrate the calendar-day of our
Saint Michel de Montaigne, by counting and describing these doubts
or negations. I wish to ferret them out of their holes and sun them
a little. We must do with them as the police do with old rogues, who
are shown up to the public at the marshal's office. They will never be
so formidable when once they have been identified and registered.
But I mean honestly by them,- that justice shall be done to their
terrors. I shall not take Sunday objections, made up on purpose to
be put down. I shall take the worst I can find, whether I can
dispose of them or they of me.

  I do not press the skepticism of the materialist. I know the
quadruped opinion will not prevail. 'Tis of no importance what bats
and oxen think. The first dangerous symptom I report is, the levity of
intellect; as if it were fatal to earnestness to know much.
Knowledge is the knowing that we can not know. The dull pray; the
geniuses are light mockers. How respectable is earnestness on every
platform! but intellect kills it. Nay, San Carlo,*(29) my subtle and
admirable friend, one of the most penetrating of men, finds that all
direct ascension, even of lofty piety, leads to this ghastly insight
and sends back the votary orphaned. My astonishing San Carlo thought
the lawgivers and saints infected. They found the are empty; saw,
and would not tell; and tried to choke off their approaching
followers, by saying, "Action, action, my dear fellows, is for you!"
Bad as was to me this detection by San Carlo, this-frost in July, this
blow from a bride, there was still a worse, namely the cloy or satiety
of the saints. In the mount of vision, ere they have yet risen from
their knees, they say, "We discover that this our homage and beatitude
is partial and deformed: we must fly for relief to the suspected and
reviled Intellect, to the Understanding, the Mephistopheles, to the
gymnastics of talent."

  This is hobgoblin the first; and though it has been the subject of
much elegy in our nineteenth century, from Byron, Goethe and other
poets of less fame, not to mention many distinguished private
observers,- I confess it is not very affecting to my imagination;
for it seems to concern the shattering of baby-houses and
crockery-shops. What flutters the Church of Rome, or of England, or of
Geneva, or of Boston, may yet be very far from touching any
principle of faith. I think that the intellect and moral sentiment are
unanimous; and that though philosophy extirpates bugbears, yet it
supplies the natural checks of vice, and polarity to the soul. I think
that the wiser a man is, the more stupendous he finds the natural
and moral economy, and lifts himself to a more absolute reliance.

  There is the power of moods, each setting at nought all but its
own tissue of facts and beliefs. There is the power of complexions,
obviously modifying the dispositions and sentiments. The beliefs and
unbeliefs appear to be structural; and as soon as each man attains the
poise and vivacity which allow the whole machinery to play, he will
not need extreme examples, but will rapidly alternate all opinions
in his own life. Our life is March weather, savage and serene in one
hour. We go forth austere, dedicated, believing in the iron links of
Destiny, and will not turn on our heel to save our life: but a book,
or a bust, or only the sound of a name, shoots a spark through the
nerves, and we suddenly believe in will: my finger-ring shall be the
seal of Solomon; fate is for imbeciles; all is possible to the
resolved mind. Presently a new experience gives a new turn to our
thoughts: common sense resumes its tyranny; we say, "Well, the army,
after all, is the gate to fame, manners and poetry: and, look you,- on
the whole, selfishness plants best, prunes best, makes the best
commerce and the best citizen." Are the opinions of a man on right and
wrong, on fate and causation, at the mercy of a broken sleep or an
indigestion? Is his belief in God and Duty no deeper than a stomach
evidence? And what guaranty for the permanence of his opinions? I like
not the French celerity,- a new Church and State once a week. This
is the second negation; and I shall let it pass for what it will. As
far as it asserts rotation of states of mind, I suppose it suggests
its own remedy, namely in the record of larger periods. What is the
mean of many states; of all the states? Does the general voice of ages
affirm any principle, or is no community of sentiment discoverable
in distant times and places? And when it shows the power of
self-interest, I accept that as part of the divine law and must
reconcile it with aspiration the best I can.

  The word Fate, or Destiny, expresses the sense of mankind, in all
ages, that the laws of the world do not always befriend, but often
hurt and crush us. Fate, in the shape of Kinde or nature, grows over
us like grass. We paint Time with a scythe; Love and Fortune, blind;
and Destiny, deaf. We have too little power of resistance against this
ferocity which champs us up. What front can we make against these
unavoidable, victorious, maleficent forces? What can I do against
the influence of Race, in my history? What can I do against hereditary
and constitutional habits; against scrofula, lymph, impotence? against
climate, against barbarism, in my country? I can reason down or deny
every thing, except this perpetual Belly: feed he must and will, and I
cannot make him respectable.

  But the main resistance which the affirmative impulse finds, and one
including all others, is in the doctrine of the Illusionists. There is
a painful rumor in circulation that we have been practised upon in all
the principal performances of life, and free agency is the emptiest
name. We have been sopped and drugged with the air, with food, with
woman, with children, with sciences, with events, which leave us
exactly where they found us. The mathematics, 'tis complained, leave
the mind where they find it: so do all sciences; and so do all
events and actions. I find a man who has passed through all the
sciences, the churl he was; and, through all the offices, learned,
civil and social, can detect the child. We are not the less
necessitated to dedicate life to them. In fact we may come to accept
it as the fixed rule and theory of our state of education, that God is
a substance, and his method is illusion. The Eastern sages owned the
goddess Yoganidra, the great illusory energy of Vishnu, by whom, as
utter ignorance, the whole world is beguiled.

  Or shall I state it thus?- The astonishment of life is the absence
of any appearance of reconciliation between the theory and practice of
life. Reason, the prized reality, the Law, is apprehended, now and
then, for a serene and profound moment amidst the hubbub of cares
and works which have no direct bearing on it;- is then lost for months
or years, and again found for an interval, to be lost again. If we
compute it in time, we may, in fifty years, have half a dozen
reasonable hours. But what are these cares and works the better? A
method in the world we do not see, but this parallelism of great and
little, which never react on each other, nor discover the smallest
tendency to converge. Experiences, fortunes, governings, readings,
writings, are nothing to the purpose; as when a man comes into the
room it does not appear whether he has been fed on yams or buffalo,-
he has contrived to get so much bone and fibre as he wants, out of
rice or out of snow. So vast is the disproportion between the sky of
law and the pismire of performance under it, that whether he is a
man of worth or a sot is not so great a matter as we say. Shall I add,
as one juggle of this enchantment, the stunning non-intercourse law
which makes co-operation impossible? The young spirit pants to enter
society. But all the ways of culture and greatness lead to solitary
imprisonment. He has been often baulked. He did not expect a sympathy,
with his thought from the village, but he went with it to the chosen
and intelligent, and found no entertainment for it, but mere
misapprehension, distaste and scoffing. Men are strangely mistimed and
misapplied; and the excellence of each is an inflamed individualism
which separates him more.

  There are these, and more than these diseases of thought, which
our ordinary teachers do not attempt to remove. Now shall we,
because a good nature inclines us to virtue's side, say, There are
no doubts,- and lie for the right? Is life to be led in a brave or
in a cowardly manner? and is not the satisfaction of the doubts
essential to all manliness? Is the name of virtue to be a barrier to
that which is virtue? Can you not believe that a man of earnest and
burly habit may find small good in tea, essays and catechism, and want
a rougher instruction, want men, labor, trade, farming, war, hunger,
plenty, love, hatred, doubt and terror to make things plain to him;
and has he not a right to insist on being convinced in his own way?
When he is convinced, he will be worth the pains.

  Belief consists in accepting the affirmations of the soul; unbelief,
in denying them. Some minds are incapable of skepticism. The doubts
they profess to entertain are rather a civility or accommodation to
the common discourse of their company. They may well give themselves
leave to speculate, for they are secure of a return. Once admitted
to the heaven of thought, they see no relapse into night, but infinite
invitation on the other side. Heaven is within heaven, and sky over
sky, and they are encompassed with divinities. Others there are to
whom the heaven is brass, and it shuts down to the surface of the
earth. It is a question of temperament, or of more or less immersion
in nature. The last class must needs have a reflex or parasite
faith; not a sight of realities, but an instinctive reliance on the
seers and believers of realities. The manners and thoughts of
believers astonish them and convince them that these have seen
something which is hid from themselves. But their sensual habit
would fix the believer to his last position, whilst he as inevitably
advances; and presently the unbeliever, for love of belief, burns
the believer.

  Great believers are always reckoned infidels, impracticable,
fantastic, atheistic, and really men of no account. The spiritualist
finds himself driven to express his faith by a series of
skepticisms. Charitable souls come with their projects and ask his
co-operation. How can he hesitate? It is the rule of mere comity and
courtesy to agree where you can, and to turn your sentence with
something auspicious, and not freezing and sinister. But he is
forced to say, "O, these things will be as they must be: what can
you do? These particular griefs and crimes are the foliage and fruit
of such trees as we see growing. It is vain to complain of the leaf or
the berry; cut it off, it will bear another just as bad. You must
begin your cure lower down." The generosities of the day prove an
intractable element for him. The people's questions are not his; their
methods are not his; and against all the dictates of good nature he is
driven to say he has no pleasure in them.

  Even the doctrines dear to the hope of man, of the divine Providence
and of the immortality of the soul, his neighbors can not put the
statement so that he shall affirm it. But he denies out of more faith,
and not less. He denies out of honesty. He had rather stand charged
with the imbecility of skepticism, than with untruth. I believe, he
says, in the moral design of the universe; it exists hospitably for
the weal of souls; but your dogmas seem to me caricatures: why
should I make believe them? Will any say, This is cold and infidel?
The wise and magnanimous will not say so. They will exult in his
far-sighted good-will that can abandon to the adversary all the ground
of tradition and common belief, without losing a jot of strength. It
sees to the end of all transgression. George Fox saw that there was
"an ocean of darkness and death; but withal an infinite ocean of light
and love which flowed over that of darkness."

  The final solution in which skepticism is lost, is in the moral
sentiment, which never forfeits its supremacy. All moods may be safely
tried, and their weight allowed to all objections: the moral sentiment
as easily outweighs them all, as any one. This is the drop which
balances the sea. I play with the miscellany of facts, and take
those superficial views which we call skepticism; but I know that they
will presently appear to me in that order which makes skepticism
impossible. A man of thought must feel the thought that is parent of
the universe; that the masses of nature do undulate and flow.

  This faith avails to the whole emergency of life and objects. The
world is saturated with deity and with law. He is content with just
and unjust, with sots and fools, with the triumph of folly and
fraud. He can behold with serenity the yawning gulf between the
ambition of man and his power of performance, between the demand and
supply of power, which makes the tragedy of all souls.

  Charles Fourier announced that "the attractions of man are
proportioned to his destinies"; in other words, that every desire
predicts its own satisfaction. Yet all experience exhibits the reverse
of this; the incompetency of power is the universal grief of young and
ardent minds. They accuse the divine Providence of a certain
parsimony. It has shown the heaven and earth to every child and filled
him with a desire for the whole; a desire raging, infinite; a
hunger, as of space to be filled with planets; a cry of famine, as
of devils for souls. Then for the satisfaction,- to each man is
administered a single drop, a bead of dew of vital power, per day,-
a cup as large as space, and one drop of the water of life in it. Each
man woke in the morning with an appetite that could eat the solar
system like a cake; a spirit for action and passion without bounds; he
could lay his hand on the morning star; he could try conclusions
with gravitation or chemistry; but, on the first motion to prove his
strength,- hands, feet, senses, gave way and would not serve him. He
was an emperor deserted by his states, and left to whistle by himself,
or thrust into a mob of emperors, all whistling: and still the
sirens sang, "The attractions are proportioned to the destinies." In
every house, in the heart of each maiden and of each boy, in the
soul of the soaring saint, this chasm is found,- between the largest
promise of ideal power, and the shabby experience.

  The expansive nature of truth comes to our succor, elastic, not to
be surrounded. Man helps himself by larger generalizations. The lesson
of life is practically to generalize; to believe what the years and
the centuries say, against the hours; to resist the usurpation of
particulars; to penetrate to their catholic sense. Things seem to
say one thing, and say the reverse. The appearance is immoral; the
result is moral. Things seem to tend downward, to justify despondency,
to promote rogues, to defeat the just; and by knaves as by martyrs the
just cause is carried forward. Although knaves win in every
political struggle, although society seems to be delivered over from
the hands of one set of criminals into the hands of another set of
criminals, as fast as the government is changed, and the march of
civilization is a train of felonies,- yet, general ends are somehow
answered. We see, now, events forced on which seem to retard or
retrograde the civility of ages. But the world-spirit is a good
swimmer, and storms and waves cannot drown him. He snaps his finger at
laws: and so, throughout history, heaven seems to affect low and
poor means. Through the years and the centuries, through evil
agents, through toys and atoms, a great and beneficent tendency
irresistibly streams.

  Let a man learn to look for the permanent in the mutable and
fleeting; let him learn to bear the disappearance of things he was
wont to reverence without losing his reverence; let him learn that
he is here, not to work but to be worked upon; and that, though
abyss open under abyss, and opinion displace opinion, all are at
last contained in the Eternal Cause:-

           "If my bark sink, 'tis to another sea."
SHAKESPEARE

                       SHAKESPEARE

                       or, The Poet

  GREAT MEN are more distinguished by range and tent than by
originality. If we require the originality which consists in
weaving, like a spider, their web from their own bowels; in finding
clay and making bricks and building the house; no great men are
original. Nor does valuable originality consist in unlikeness to other
men. The hero is in the press of knights and the thick of events;
and seeing what men want and sharing their desire, he adds the needful
length of sight and of arm, to come at the desired point. The greatest
genius is the most indebted man. A poet is no rattle-brain, saying
what comes uppermost, and, because he says every thing, saying at last
something good; but a heart in unison with his time and country. There
is nothing whimsical and fantastic in his production, but sweet and
sad earnest, freighted with the weightiest convictions and pointed
with the most determined aim which any man or class knows of in his
times.

  The Genius of our life is jealous of individuals, and will not
have any individual great, except through the general. There is no
choice to genius. A great man does not wake up on some fine morning
and say, "I am full of life, I will go to sea and find an Antarctic
continent: to-day I will square the circle: I will ransack botany
and find a new food for man: I have a new architecture in my mind: I
foresee a new mechanic power": no, but he finds himself in the river
of the thoughts and events, forced onward by the ideas and necessities
of his contemporaries. He stands where all the eyes of men look one
way, and their hands all point in the direction in which he should go.
The Church has reared him amidst rites and pomps, and he carries out
the advice which her music gave him, and builds a cathedral needed
by her chants and processions. He finds a war raging: it educates him,
by trumpet, in barracks, and he betters the instruction. He finds
two counties groping to bring coal, or flour, or fish, from the
place of production to the place of consumption, and he hits on a
railroad. Every master has found his materials collected, and his
power lay in his sympathy with his people and in his love of the
materials he wrought in. What an economy of power! and what a
compensation for the shortness of life! All is done to his hand. The
world has brought him thus far on his way. The human race has gone out
before him, sunk the hills, filled the hollows and bridged the rivers.
Men, nations, poets, artisans, women, all have worked for him, and
he enters into their labors. Choose any other thing, out of the line
of tendency, out of the national feeling and history, and he would
have all to do for himself: his powers would be expended in the
first preparations. Great genial power, one would almost say, consists
in not being original at all; in being altogether receptive; in
letting the world do all, and suffering the spirit of the hour to pass
unobstructed through the mind.

  Shakespeare's youth fell in a time when the English people were
importunate for dramatic entertainments. The court took offence easily
at political allusions and attempted to suppress them. The Puritans, a
growing and energetic party, and the religious among the Anglican
church, would suppress them. But the people wanted them. Inn-yards,
houses without roofs, and extemporaneous enclosures at country fairs
were the ready theatres of strolling players. The people had tasted
this new joy; and, as we could not hope to suppress newspapers now,-
no, not by the strongest party,- neither then could king, prelate,
or puritan, alone or united, suppress an organ which was ballad, epic,
newspaper, caucus, lecture, Punch and library, at the same time.
Probably king, prelate and puritan, all found their own account in it.
It had become, by all causes, a national interest,- by no means
conspicuous, so that some great scholar would have thought of treating
it in an English history,- but not a whit less considerable because it
was cheap and of no account, like a baker's-shop. The best proof of
its vitality is the crowd of writers which suddenly broke into this
field; Kyd, Marlow, Greene, Jonson, Chapman, Dekker, Webster, Heywood,
Middleton, Peele, Ford, Massinger, Beaumont and Fletcher.

  The secure possession, by the stage, of the public mind, is of the
first importance to the poet who works for it. He loses no time in
idle experiments. Here is audience and expectation prepared. In the
case of Shakespeare there is much more. At the time when he left
Stratford and went up to London, a great body of stage-plays of all
dates and writers existed in manuscript and were in turn produced on
the boards. Here is the Tale of Troy, which the audience will bear
hearing some part of, every week; the Death of Julius Caesar, and
other stories out of Plutarch, which they never tire of; a shelf
full of English history, from the chronicles of Brut and Arthur,
down to the royal Henries, which men hear eagerly; and a string of
doleful tragedies, merry Italian tales and Spanish voyages, which
all the London 'prentices know. All the mass has been treated, with
more or less skill, by every playwright, and the prompter has the
soiled and tattered manuscripts. It is now no longer possible to say
who wrote them first. They have been the property of the Theatre so
long, and so many rising geniuses have enlarged or altered them,
inserting a speech or a whole scene, or adding a song, that no man can
any longer claim copyright in this work of numbers. Happily, no man
wishes to. They are not yet desired in that way. We have few
readers, many spectators and hearers. They had best lie where they
are.

  Shakespeare, in common with his comrades, esteemed the mass of old
plays waste stock, in which any experiment could be freely tried.
Had the prestige which hedges about a modern tragedy existed,
nothing could have been done. The rude warm blood of the living
England circulated in the play, as in street-ballads, and gave body
which he wanted to his airy and majestic fancy. The poet needs a
ground in popular tradition on which he may work, and which, again,
may restrain his art within the due temperance. It holds him to the
people, supplies a foundation for his edifice, and in furnishing so
much work done to his hand, leaves him at leisure and in full strength
for the audacities of his imagination. In short, the poet owes to
his legend what sculpture owed to the temple. Sculpture in Egypt and
in Greece grew up in subordination to architecture. It was the
ornament of the temple wall: at first a rude relief carved on
pediments, then the relief became bolder and a head or arm was
projected from the wall; the groups being still arranged with
reference to the building, which serves also as a frame to hold the
figures; and when at last the greatest freedom of style and
treatment was reached, the prevailing genius of architecture still
enforced a certain calmness and continence in the statue. As soon as
the statue was begun for itself, and with no reference to the temple
or palace, the art began to decline: freak, extravagance and
exhibition took the place of the old temperance. This balance-wheel,
which the sculptor found in architecture, the perilous irritability of
poetic talent found in the accumulated dramatic materials to which the
people were already wonted, and which had a certain excellence which
no single genius, however extraordinary, could hope to create.

  In point of fact it appears that Shakespeare did owe debts in all
directions, and was able to use whatever he found; and the amount of
indebtedness may be inferred from Malone's laborious computations in
regard to the First, Second and Third parts of Henry VI, in which,
"out of 6043 lines, 1771 were written by some author preceding
Shakespeare, 2373 by him, on the foundation laid by his
predecessors, and 1899 were entirely his own." And the proceeding
investigation hardly leaves a single drama of his absolute
invention. Malone's sentence is an important piece of external
history. In Henry VIII I think I see plainly the cropping out of the
original rock on which his own finer stratum was laid. The first
play was written by a superior, thoughtful man, with a vicious ear.
I can mark his lines, and know well their cadence. See Wolsey's
soliloquy, and the following scene with Cromwell, where instead of the
metre of Shakespeare, whose secret is that the thought constructs
the tune, so that reading for the sense will best bring out the
rhythm,- here the lines are constructed on a given tune, and the verse
has even a trace of pulpit eloquence. But the play contains through
all its length unmistakable traits of Shakespeare's hand, and some
passages, as the account of the coronation, are like autographs.
What is odd, the compliment to Queen Elizabeth is in the bad rhythm.

  Shakespeare knew that tradition supplies a better fable than any
invention can. If he lost any credit of design, he augmented his
resources; and, at that day, our petulant demand for originality was
not so much pressed. There was no literature for the million. The
universal reading, the cheap press, were unknown. A great poet who
appears in illiterate times, absorbs into his sphere all the light
which is any where radiating. Every intellectual jewel, every flower
of sentiment it is his fine office to bring to his people; and he
comes to value his memory equally with his invention. He is
therefore little solicitous whence his thoughts have been derived;
whether through translation, whether through tradition, whether by
travel in distant countries, whether by inspiration; from whatever
source, they are equally welcome to his uncritical audience. Nay, he
borrows very near home. Other men say wise things as well as he;
only they say a good many foolish things, and do not know when they
have spoken wisely. He knows the sparkle of the true stone, and puts
it in high place, wherever he finds it. Such is the happy position
of Homer perhaps; of Chaucer, of Saadi. They felt that all wit was
their wit. And they are librarians and historiographers, as well as
poets. Each romancer was heir and dispenser of all the hundred tales
of the world,-

         "Presenting Thebes' and Pelops' line

          And the tale of Troy divine."

The influence of Chaucer is conspicuous in all our early literature;
and more recently not only Pope and Dryden have been beholden to
him, but, in the whole society of English writers, a large
unacknowledged debt is easily traced. One is charmed with the opulence
which feeds so many pensioners. But Chaucer is a huge borrower.
Chaucer, it seems, drew continually, through Lydgate and
Caxton,*(30) from Guido di Colonna, whose Latin romance of the
Trojan war was in turn a compilation from Dares Phrygius, Ovid and
Statius. Then Petrarch, Boccaccio and the Provencal poets are his
benefactors: the Romaunt of the Rose is only judicious translation
from William of Lorris and John of Meung: Troilus and Creseide, from
Lollius of Urbino: The Cock and the Fox, from the Lais of Marie: The
House of Fame, from the French or Italian: and poor Gower he uses as
if he were only a brick-kiln or stone-quarry out of which to build his
house. He steals by this apology,- that what he takes has no worth
where he finds it and the greatest where he leaves it. It has come
to be practically a sort of rule in literature, that a man having once
shown himself capable of original writing, is entitled thenceforth
to steal from the writings of others at discretion. Thought is the
property of him who can entertain it and of him who can adequately
place it. A certain awkwardness marks the use of borrowed thoughts;
but as soon as we have learned what to do with them they become our
own.

  Thus all originality is relative. Every thinker is retrospective.
The learned member of the legislature, at Westminster or at
Washington, speaks and votes for thousands. Show us the
constituency, and the now invisible channels by which the senator is
made aware of their wishes; the crowd of practical and knowing men,
who, by correspondence or conversation, are feeding him with evidence,
anecdotes and estimates, and it will bereave his fine attitude and
resistance of something of their impressiveness. As Sir Robert Peel
and Mr. Webster vote, so Locke and Rousseau think, for thousands;
and so there were fountains all around Homer, Menu, Saadi, or
Milton, from which they drew; friends, lovers, books, traditions,
proverbs,- all perished- which, if seen, would go to reduce the
wonder. Did the bard speak with authority? Did he feel himself
overmatched by any companion? The appeal is to the consciousness of
the writer. Is there at last in his breast a Delphi whereof to ask
concerning any thought or thing, whether it be verily so, yea or
nay? and to have answer, and to rely on that? All the debts which such
a man could contract to other wit would never disturb his
consciousness of originality; for the ministrations of books and of
other minds are a whiff of smoke to that most private reality with
which he has conversed.

  It is easy to see that what is best written or done by genius in the
world, was no man's work, but came by wide social labor, when a
thousand wrought like one, sharing the same impulse. Our English Bible
is a wonderful specimen of the strength and music of the English
language. But it was not made by one man, or at one time; but
centuries and churches brought it to perfection. There never was a
time when there was not some translation existing. The Liturgy,
admired for its energy and pathos, is an anthology of the piety of
ages and nations, a translation of the prayers and forms of the
Catholic church,- these collected, too, in long periods, from the
prayers and meditations of every saint and sacred writer all over
the world. Grotius makes the like remark in respect to the Lord's
Prayer, that the single clauses of which it is composed were already
in use in the time of Christ, in the Rabbinical forms. He picked out
the grains of gold. The nervous language of the Common Law, the
impressive forms of our courts and the precision and substantial truth
of the legal distinctions, are the contribution of all the
sharp-sighted, strong-minded men who have lived in the countries where
these laws govern. The translation of Plutarch gets its excellence
by being translation on translation. There never was a time when there
was none. All the truly idiomatic and national phrases are kept, and
all others successively picked out and thrown away. Something like the
same process had gone on, long before, with the originals of these
books. The world takes liberties with world-books. Vedas, Aesop's
Fables, Pilpay, Arabian Nights, Cid, Iliad, Robin Hood, Scottish
Minstrelsy, are not the work of single men. In the composition of such
works the time thinks, the market thinks, the mason, the carpenter,
the merchant, the farmer, the fop, all think for us. Every book
supplies its time with one good word; every municipal law, every
trade, every folly of the day; and the generic catholic genius who
is not afraid or ashamed to owe his originality to the originality
of all, stands with the next age as the recorder and embodiment of his
own.

  We have to thank the researches of antiquaries, and the
Shakespeare Society, for ascertaining the steps of the English
drama, from the Mysteries celebrated in churches and by churchmen, and
the final detachment from the church, and the completion of secular
plays, from Ferrex and Porrex, and Gammer Gurton's Needle, down to the
possession of the stage by the very pieces which Shakespeare
altered, remodelled and finally made his own. Elated with success
and piqued by the growing interest of the problem, they have left no
book-stall unsearched, no chest in a garret unopened, no file of old
yellow accounts to decompose in damp and worms, so keen was the hope
to discover whether the boy Shakespeare poached or not, whether he
held horses at the theatre door, whether he kept school, and why he
left in his will only his second-best bed to Ann Hathaway, his wife.

  There is somewhat touching in the madness with which the passing age
mischooses the object on which all candles shine and all eyes are
turned; the care with which it registers every trifle touching Queen
Elizabeth and King James, and the Essexes, Leicesters, Burleighs and
Buckinghams; and lets pass without a single valuable note the
founder of another dynasty, which alone will cause the Tudor dynasty
to be remembered,- the man who carries the Saxon race in him by the
inspiration which feeds him, and on whose thoughts the foremost people
of the world are now for some ages to be nourished, and minds to
receive this and not another bias. A popular player;- nobody suspected
he was the poet of the human race; and the secret was kept as
faithfully from poets and intellectual men as from courtiers and
frivolous people. Bacon, who took the inventory of the human
understanding for his times, never mentioned his name. Ben Jonson,
though we have strained his few words of regard and panegyric, had
no suspicion of the elastic fame whose first vibrations he was
attempting. He no doubt thought the praise he has conceded to him
generous, and esteemed himself, out of all question, the better poet
of the two.

  If it need wit to know wit, according to the proverb,
Shakespeare's time should be capable of recognizing it. Sir Henry
Wotton was born four years after Shakespeare, and died twenty-three
years after him; and I find, among his correspondents and
acquaintances, the following persons: Theodore Beza, Isaac Casaubon,
Sir Philip Sidney, the Earl of Essex, Lord Bacon, Sir Walter
Raleigh, John Milton, Sir Henry Vane, Isaac Walton, Dr. Donne, Abraham
Cowley, Bellarmine, Charles Cotton, John Pym, John Hales, Kepler,
Vieta, Albericus Gentilis, Paul Sarpi, Arminius; with all of whom
exists some token of his having communicated, without enumerating many
others whom doubtless he saw,- Shakespeare, Spenser, Jonson, Beaumont,
Massinger, the two Herberts, Marlow, Chapman and the rest. Since the
constellation of great men who appeared in Greece in the time of
Pericles, there was never any such society;- yet their genius failed
them to find out the best head in the universe. Our poet's mask was
impenetrable. You cannot see the mountain near. It took a century to
make it suspected; and not until two centuries had passed, after his
death, did any criticism which we think adequate begin to appear. It
was not possible to write the history of Shakespeare till now; for
he is the father of German literature: it was with the introduction of
Shakespeare into German, by Lessing, and the translation of his
works by Wieland and Schlegel, that the rapid burst of German
literature was most intimately connected. It was not until the
nineteenth century, whose speculative genius is a sort of living
Hamlet, that the tragedy of Hamlet could find such wondering
readers.*(31) Now, literature, philosophy and thought are
Shakespearized. His mind is the horizon beyond which, at present, we
do not see. Our ears are educated to music by his rhythm. Coleridge
and Goethe are the only critics who have expressed our convictions
with any adequate fidelity: but there is in all cultivated minds a
silent appreciation of his superlative power and beauty, which, like
Christianity, qualifies the period.

  The Shakespeare Society have inquired in all directions,
advertised the missing facts, offered money for any information that
will lead to proof,- and with what result? Beside some important
illustration of the history of the English stage, to which I have
adverted, they have gleaned a few facts touching the property, and
dealings in regard to property, of the poet. It appears that from year
to year he owned a larger share in the Blackfriars' Theatre: its
wardrobe and other appurtenances were his: that he bought an estate in
his native village with his earnings as writer and shareholder; that
he lived in the best house in Stratford; was intrusted by his
neighbors with their commissions in London, as of borrowing money, and
the like; that he was a veritable farmer. About the time when he was
writing Macbeth, he sues Philip Rogers, in the borough-court of
Stratford, for thirty-five shillings, ten pence, for corn delivered to
him at different times; and in all respects appears as a good husband,
with no reputation for eccentricity or excess. He was a good-natured
sort of man, an actor and shareholder in the theatre, not in any
striking manner distinguished from other actors and managers. I
admit the importance of this information. It was well worth the
pains that have been taken to procure it.

  But whatever scraps of information concerning his condition these
researches may have rescued, they can shed no light upon that infinite
invention which is the concealed magnet of his attraction for us. We
are very clumsy writers of history. We tell the chronicle of
parentage, birth, birth-place, schooling, school-mates, earning of
money, marriage, publication of books, celebrity, death; and when we
have come to an end of this gossip, no ray of relation appears between
it and the goddess-born; and it seems as if, had we dipped at random
into the "Modern Plutarch," and read any other life there, it would
have fitted the poems as well. It is the essence of poetry to
spring, like the rainbow daughter of Wonder, from the invisible, to
abolish the past and refuse all history. Malone, Warburton, Dyce and
Collier have wasted their oil. The famed theatres, Covent Garden,
Drury Lane, the Park and Tremont have vainly assisted. Betterton,
Garrick, Kemble, Kean and Macready dedicate their lives to this
genius; him they crown, elucidate, obey and express. The genius
knows them not. The recitation begins; one golden word leaps out
immortal from all this painted pedantry and sweetly torments us with
invitations to its own inaccessible homes. I remember I went once to
see the Hamlet of a famed performer, the pride of the English stage;
and all I then heard and all I now remember of the tragedian was
that in which the tragedian had no part; simply Hamlet's question to
the ghost:-

                          "What may this mean,

         That thou, dead corse, again in complete steel

         Revisit'st thus the glimpses of the moon?"

That imagination which dilates the closet he writes in to the
world's dimension, crowds it with agents in rank and order, as quickly
reduces the big reality to be the glimpses of the moon. These tricks
of his magic spoil for us the illusions of the greenroom. Can any
biography shed light on the localities into which the Midsummer
Night's Dream admits me? Did Shakespeare confide to any notary or
parish recorder, sacristan, or surrogate in Stratford, the genesis
of that delicate creation? The forest of Arden, the nimble air of
Scone Castle, the moonlight of Portia's villa, "the antres vast and
desarts idle" of Othello's captivity,- where is the third cousin, or
grand-nephew, the chancellor's file of accounts, or private letter,
that has kept one word of those transcendent secrets? In fine, in this
drama, as in all great works of art,- in the Cyclopean architecture of
Egypt and India, in the Phidian sculpture, the Gothic minsters, the
Italian painting, the Ballads of Spain and Scotland,- the Genius draws
up the ladder after him, when the creative age goes up to heaven,
and gives way to a new age, which sees the works and asks in vain
for a history.

  Shakespeare is the only biographer of Shakespeare; and even he can
tell nothing, except to the Shakespeare in us, that is, to our most
apprehensive and sympathetic hour. He cannot step from off his
tripod and give us anecdotes of his inspirations. Read the antique
documents extricated, analyzed and compared by the assiduous Dyce
and Collier, and now read one of these skyey sentences,- aerolites,-
which seem to have fallen out of heaven, and which not your experience
but the man within the breast has accepted as words of fate, and
tell me if they match; if the former account in any manner for the
latter; or which gives the most historical insight into the man.

  Hence, though our external history is so meagre, yet, with
Shakespeare for biographer, instead of Aubrey and Rowe, we have really
the information which is material; that which describes character
and fortune, that which, if we were about to meet the man and deal
with him, would most import us to know. We have his recorded
convictions on those questions which knock for answer at every heart,-
on life and death, on love, on wealth and poverty, on the prizes of
life and the ways whereby we come at them; on the characters of men,
and the influences, occult and open, which affect their fortunes;
and on those mysterious and demoniacal powers which defy our science
and which yet interweave their malice and their gift in our
brightest hours. Who ever read the volume of the Sonnets without
finding that the poet had there revealed, under masks that are no
masks to the intelligent, the lore of friendship and of love; the
confusion of sentiments in the most susceptible, and, at the same
time, the most intellectual of men? What trait of his private mind has
he hidden in his dramas? One can discern, in his ample pictures of the
gentleman and the king, what forms and humanities pleased him; his
delight in troops of friends, in large hospitality, in cheerful
giving. Let Timon, let Warwick, let Antonio the merchant answer for
his great heart. So far from Shakespeare's being the least known, he
is the one person, in all modern history, known to us. What point of
morals, of manners, of economy, of philosophy, of religion, of
taste, of the conduct of life, has he not settled? What mystery has he
not signified his knowledge of? What office, or function, or
district of man's work, has he not remembered? What king has he not
taught state, as Talma taught Napoleon? What maiden has not found
him finer than her delicacy? What lover has he not outloved? What sage
has he not outseen? What gentleman has he not instructed in the
rudeness of his behavior?

  Some able and appreciating critics think no criticism on Shakespeare
valuable that does not rest purely on the dramatic merit; that he is
falsely judged as poet and philosopher. I think as highly as these
critics of his dramatic merit, but still think it secondary. He was
a full man, who liked to talk; a brain exhaling thoughts and images,
which, seeking vent, found the drama next at hand. Had he been less,
we should have had to consider how well he filled his place, how
good a dramatist he was,- and he is the best in the world. But it
turns out that what he has to say is of that weight as to withdraw
some attention from the vehicle; and he is like some saint whose
history is to be rendered into all languages, into verse and prose,
into songs and pictures, and cut up into proverbs; so that the
occasion which gave the saint's meaning the form of a conversation, or
of a prayer, or of a code of laws, is immaterial compared with the
universality of its application. So it fares with the wise Shakespeare
and his book of life. He wrote the airs for all our modern music: he
wrote the text of modern life; the text of manners: he drew the man of
England and Europe; the father of the man in America; he drew the man,
and described the day, and what is done in it: he read the hearts of
men and women, their probity, and their second thought and wiles;
the wiles of innocence, and the transitions by which virtues and vices
slide into their contraries: he could divide the mother's part from
the father's part in the face of the child, or draw the fine
demarcations of freedom and of fate: he knew the laws of repression
which make the police of nature: and all the sweets and all the
terrors of human lot lay in his mind as truly but as softly as the
landscape lies on the eye. And the importance of this wisdom of life
sinks the form, as of Drama or Epic, out of notice. 'Tis like making a
question concerning the paper on which a king's message is written.

  Shakespeare is as much out of the category of eminent authors, as he
is out of the crowd. He is inconceivably wise; the others,
conceivably. A good reader can, in a sort, nestle into Plato's brain
and think from thence; but not into Shakespeare's. We are still out of
doors. For executive faculty, for creation, Shakespeare is unique.
No man can imagine it better. He was the farthest reach of subtlety
compatible with an individual self,- the subtilest of authors, and
only just within the possibility of authorship. With this wisdom of
life is the equal endowment of imaginative and of lyric power. He
clothed the creatures of his legend with form and sentiments as if
they were people who had lived under his roof; and few real men have
left such distinct characters as these fictions. And they spoke in
language as sweet as it was fit. Yet his talents never seduced him
into an ostentation, nor did he harp on one string. An omnipresent
humanity co-ordinates all his faculties. Give a man of talents a story
to tell, and his partiality will presently appear. He has certain
observations, opinions, topics, which have some accidental prominence,
and which he disposes all to exhibit. He crams this part and starves
that other part, consulting not the fitness of the thing, but his
fitness and strength. But Shakespeare has no peculiarity, no
importunate topic; but all is duly given; no veins, no curiosities; no
cow-painter, no bird-fancier, no mannerist is he: he has no
discoverable egotism: the great he tells greatly; the small
subordinately. He is wise without emphasis or assertion; he is strong,
as nature is strong, who lifts the land into mountain slopes without
effort and by the same rule as she floats a bubble in the air, and
likes as well to do the one as the other. This makes that equality
of power in farce, tragedy, narrative, and love-songs; a merit so
incessant that each reader is incredulous of the perception of other
readers.

  This power of expression, or of transferring the inmost truth of
things into music and verse, makes him the type of the poet and has
added a new problem to metaphysics. This is that which throws him into
natural history, as a main production of the globe, and as
announcing new eras and ameliorations. Things were mirrored in his
poetry without loss or blur: he could paint the fine with precision,
the great with compass, the tragic and the comic indifferently and
without any distortion or favor. He carried his powerful execution
into minute details, to a hair point; finishes an eyelash or a
dimple as firmly as he draws a mountain; and yet these, like nature's,
will bear the scrutiny of the solar microscope.

  In short, he is the chief example to prove that more or less of
production, more or fewer pictures, is a thing indifferent. He had the
power to make one picture. Daguerre learned how to let one flower etch
its image on his plate of iodine, and then proceeds at leisure to etch
a million. There are always objects; but there was never
representation. Here is perfect representation, at last; and now let
the world of figures sit for their portraits. No recipe can be given
for the making of a Shakespeare; but the possibility of the
translation of things into song is demonstrated.

  His lyric power lies in the genius of the piece. The sonnets, though
their excellence is lost in the splendor of the dramas, are as
inimitable as they; and it is not a merit of lines, but a total
merit of the piece; like the tone of voice of some incomparable
person, so is this a speech of poetic beings, and any clause as
unproducible now as a whole poem.

  Though the speeches in the plays, and single lines, have a beauty
which tempts the ear to pause on them for their euphuism, yet the
sentence is so loaded with meaning and so linked with its foregoers
and followers, that the logician is satisfied. His means are as
admirable as his ends; every subordinate invention, by which he
helps himself to connect some irreconcilable opposites, is a poem too.
He is not reduced to dismount and walk because his horses are
running off with him in some distant direction: he always rides.

  The finest poetry was first experience; but the thought has suffered
a transformation since it was an experience. Cultivated men often
attain a good degree of skill in writing verses; but it is easy to
read, through their poems, their personal history: any one
acquainted with the parties can name every figure; this is Andrew
and that is Rachel. The sense thus remains prosaic. It is a
caterpillar with wings, and not yet a butterfly. In the poet's mind
the fact has gone quite over into the new element of thought, and
has lost all that is exuvial. This generosity abides with Shakespeare.
We say, from the truth and closeness of his pictures, that he knows
the lesson by heart. Yet there is not a trace of egotism.

  One more royal trait properly belongs to the poet. I mean his
cheerfulness, without which no man can be a poet,- for beauty is his
aim. He loves virtue, not for its obligation but for its grace: he
delights in the world, in man, in woman, for the lovely light that
sparkles from them. Beauty, the spirit of joy and hilarity, he sheds
over the universe. Epicurus relates that poetry hath such charms
that a lover might forsake his mistress to partake of them. And the
true bards have been noted for their firm and cheerful temper. Homer
lies in sunshine; Chaucer is glad and erect; and Saadi says, "It was
rumored abroad that I was penitent; but what had I to do with
repentance?" Not less sovereign and cheerful,- much more sovereign and
cheerful, is the tone of Shakespeare. His name suggests joy and
emancipation to the heart of men. If he should appear in any company
of human souls, who would not march in his troop? He touches nothing
that does not borrow health and longevity from his festal style.

  And now, how stands the account of man with this bard and
benefactor, when, in solitude, shutting our ears to the reverberations
of his fame, we seek to strike the balance? Solitude has austere
lessons; it can teach us to spare both heroes and poets; and it weighs
Shakespeare also, and finds him to share the halfness and imperfection
of humanity.

  Shakespeare, Homer, Dante, Chaucer, saw the splendor of meaning that
plays over the visible world; knew that a tree had another use than
for apples, and corn another than for meal, and the ball of the earth,
than for tillage and roads: that these things bore a second and
finer harvest to the mind, being emblems of its thoughts, and
conveying in all their natural history a certain mute commentary on
human life. Shakespeare employed them as colors to compose his
picture. He rested in their beauty; and never took the step which
seemed inevitable to such genius, namely to explore the virtue which
resides in these symbols and imparts this power:- what is that which
they themselves say? He converted the elements which waited on his
command, into entertainments. He was master of the revels to
mankind. Is it not as if one should have, through majestic powers of
science, the comets given into his hand, or the planets and their
moons, and should draw them from their orbits to glare with the
municipal fireworks on a holiday night, and advertise in all towns,
"Very superior pyrotechny this evening"? Are the agents of nature, and
the power to understand them, worth no more than a street serenade, or
the breath of a cigar? One remembers again the trumpet-text in the
Koran,- "The heavens and the earth and all that is between them, think
ye we have created them in jest?" As long as the question is of talent
and mental power, the world of men has not his equal to show. But when
the question is, to life and its materials and its auxiliaries, how
does he profit me? What does it signify? It is but a Twelfth Night, or
Midsummer-Night's Dream, or Winter Evening's Tale: what signifies
another picture more or less? The Egyptian verdict of the
Shakespeare Societies comes to mind; that he was a jovial actor and
manager. I can not marry this fact to his verse. Other admirable men
have led lives in some sort of keeping with their thought; but this
man, in wide contrast. Had he been less, had he reached only the
common measure of great authors, of Bacon, Milton, Tasso, Cervantes,
we might leave the fact in the twilight of human fate: but that this
man of men, he who gave to the science of mind a new and larger
subject than had ever existed, and planted the standard of humanity
some furlongs forward into Chaos,- that he should not be wise for
himself;- it must even go into the world's history that the best
poet led an obscure and profane life, using his genius for the
public amusement.

  Well, other men, priest and prophet, Israelite, German and Swede,
beheld the same objects: they also saw through them that which was
contained. And to what purpose? The beauty straightway vanished;
they read commandments, all-excluding mountainous duty; an obligation,
a sadness, as of piled mountains, fell on them, and life became
ghastly, joyless, a pilgrim's progress, a probation, beleaguered round
with doleful histories of Adam's fall and curse behind us; with
doomsdays and purgatorial and penal fires before us; and the heart
of the seer and the heart of the listener sank in them.

  It must be conceded that these are half-views of half-men. The world
still wants its poet-priest, a reconciler, who shall not trifle,
with Shakespeare the player, nor shall grope in graves, with
Swedenborg the mourner; but who shall see, speak, and act, with
equal inspiration. For knowledge will brighten the sunshine; right
is more beautiful than private affection; and love is compatible
with universal wisdom.
NAPOLEON

                        NAPOLEON

                 or, The Man of the World

  AMONG the eminent persons of the nineteenth century, Bonaparte is
far the best known and the most powerful; and owes his predominance to
the fidelity with which he expresses the tone of thought and belief,
the aims of the masses of active and cultivated men. It is
Swedenborg's theory that every organ is made up of homogeneous
particles; or as it is sometimes expressed, every whole is made of
similars; that is, the lungs are composed of infinitely small lungs;
the liver, of infinitely small livers; the kidney, of little
kidneys, etc. Following this analogy, if any man is found to carry
with him the power and affections of vast numbers, if Napoleon is
France, if Napoleon is Europe, it is because the people whom he
sways are little Napoleons.

  In our society there is a standing antagonism between the
conservative and the democratic classes; between those who have made
their fortunes, and the young and the poor who have fortunes to
make; between the interests of dead labor,- that is, the labor of
hands long ago still in the grave, which labor is now entombed in
money stocks, or in land and buildings owned by idle capitalists,- and
the interests of living labor, which seeks to possess itself of land
and buildings and money stocks. The first class is timid, selfish,
illiberal, hating innovation, and continually losing numbers by death.
The second class is selfish also, encroaching, bold, self-relying,
always outnumbering the other and recruiting its numbers every hour by
births. It desires to keep open every avenue to the competition of
all, and to multiply avenues: the class of business men in America, in
England, in France and throughout Europe; the class of industry and
skill. Napoleon is its representative. The instinct of active,
brave, able men, throughout the middle class everywhere, has pointed
out Napoleon as the incarnate Democrat. He had their virtues and their
vices; above all, he had their spirit or aim. That tendency is
material, pointing at a sensual success and employing the richest
and most various means to that end; conversant with mechanical powers,
highly intellectual, widely and accurately learned and skilful, but
subordinating all intellectual and spiritual forces into means to a
material success. To be the rich man, is the end. "God has granted,"
says the Koran, "to every people a prophet in its own tongue." Paris
and London and New York, the spirit of commerce, of money and material
power, were also to have their prophet; and Bonaparte was qualified
and sent.

  Every one of the million readers of anecdotes or memoirs or lives of
Napoleon, delights in the page, because he studies in it his own
history. Napoleon is thoroughly modern, and, at the highest point of
his fortunes, has the very spirit of the newspapers. He is no
saint,- to use his own word, "no capuchin," and he is no hero, in
the high sense. The man in the street finds in him the qualities and
powers of other men in the street. He finds him, like himself, by
birth a citizen, who, by very intelligible merits, arrived at such a
commanding position that he could indulge all those tastes which the
common man possesses but is obliged to conceal and deny: good society,
good books, fast travelling, dress, dinners, servants without
number, personal weight, the execution of his ideas, the standing in
the attitude of a benefactor to all persons about him, the refined
enjoyments of pictures, statues, music, palaces and conventional
honors,- precisely what is agreeable to the heart of every man in
the nineteenth century, this powerful man possessed.

  It is true that a man of Napoleon's truth of adaptation to the
mind of the masses around him, becomes not merely representative but
actually a monopolizer and usurper of other minds. Thus Mirabeau
plagiarized every good thought, every good word that was spoken in
France. Dumont relates that he sat in the gallery of the Convention
and heard Mirabeau make a speech. It struck Dumont that he could fit
it with a peroration, which he wrote in pencil immediately, and showed
it to Lord Elgin, who sat by him. Lord Elgin approved it, and
Dumont, in the evening, showed it to Mirabeau. Mirabeau read it,
pronounced it admirable, and declared he would incorporate it into his
harangue to-morrow, to the Assembly. "It is impossible," said
Dumont, "as, unfortunately, I have shown it to Lord Elgin." "If you
have shown it to Lord Elgin and to fifty persons beside, I shall still
speak it to-morrow": and he did speak it, with much effect, at the
next day's session. For Mirabeau, with his overpowering personality,
felt that these things which his presence inspired were as much his
own as if he had said them, and that his adoption of them gave them
their weight. Much more absolute and centralizing was the successor to
Mirabeau's popularity and to much more than his predominance in
France. Indeed, a man of Napoleon's stamp almost ceases to have a
private speech and opinion. He is so largely receptive, and is so
placed, that he comes to be a bureau for all the intelligence, wit and
power of the age and country. He gains the battle; he makes the
code; he makes the system of weights and measures; he levels the Alps;
he builds the road. All distinguished engineers, savans, statists,
report to him: so likewise do all good heads in every kind: he
adopts the best measures, sets his stamp on them, and not these alone,
but on every happy and memorable expression. Every sentence spoken
by Napoleon and every line of his writing, deserves reading, as it
is the sense of France.

  Bonaparte was the idol of common men because he had in
transcendent degree the qualities and powers of common men. There is a
certain satisfaction in coming down to the lowest ground of
politics, for we get rid of cant and hypocrisy. Bonaparte wrought,
in common with that great class he represented, for power and wealth,-
but Bonaparte, specially, without any scruple as to the means. All the
sentiments which embarrass men's pursuit of these objects, he set
aside. The sentiments were for women and children. Fontanes, in
1804, expressed Napoleon's own sense, when in behalf of the Senate
he addressed him,- "Sire, the desire of perfection is the worst
disease that ever afflicted the human mind." The advocates of
liberty and of progress are "ideologists";- a word of contempt often
in his mouth;- "Necker is an ideologist": "Lafayette is an
ideologist."

  An Italian proverb, too well known, declares that "if you would
succeed, you must not be too good." It is an advantage, within certain
limits, to have renounced the dominion of the sentiments of piety,
gratitude and generosity; since what was an impassable bar to us,
and still is to others, becomes a convenient weapon for our
purposes; just as the river which was a formidable barrier, winter
transforms into the smoothest of roads.

  Napoleon renounced, once for all, sentiments and affections, and
would help himself with his hands and his head. With him is no miracle
and no magic. He is a worker in brass, in iron, in wood, in earth,
in roads, in buildings, in money and in troops, and a very
consistent and wise master-workman. He is never weak and literary, but
acts with the solidity and the precision of natural agents. He has not
lost his native sense and sympathy with things. Men give way before
such a man, as before natural events. To be sure there are men
enough who are immersed in things, as farmers, smiths, sailors and
mechanics generally; and we know how real and solid such men appear in
the presence of scholars and grammarians: but these men ordinarily
lack the power of arrangement, and are like hands without a head.
But Bonaparte superadded to this mineral and animal force, insight and
generalization, so that men saw in him combined the natural and the
intellectual power, as if the sea and land had taken flesh and begun
to cipher. Therefore the land and sea seem to presuppose him. He
came unto his own and they received him. This ciphering operative
knows what he is working with and what is the product. He knew the
properties of gold and iron, of wheels and ships, of troops and
diplomatists, and required that each should do after its kind.

  The art of war was the game in which he exerted his arithmetic. It
consisted, according to him, in having always more forces than the
enemy, on the point where the enemy is attacked, or where he
attacks: and his whole talent is strained by endless manoeuvre and
evolution, to march always on the enemy at an angle, and destroy his
forces in detail. It is obvious that a very small force, skilfully and
rapidly manoeuvring so as always to bring two men against one at the
point of engagement, will be an overmatch for a much larger body of
men.

  The times, his constitution and his early circumstances combined
to develop this pattern democrat. He had the virtues of his class
and the conditions for their activity. That common-sense which no
sooner respects any end than it finds the means to effect it; the
delight in the use of means; in the choice, simplification and
combining of means; the directness and thoroughness of his work; the
prudence with which all was seen and the energy with which all was
done, make him the natural organ and head of what I may almost call,
from its extent, the modern party.

  Nature must have far the greatest share in every success, and so
in his. Such a man was wanted, and such a man was born; a man of stone
and iron, capable of sitting on horseback sixteen or seventeen
hours, of going many days together without rest or food except by
snatches, and with the speed and spring of a tiger in action; a man
not embarrassed by any scruples; compact, instant, selfish, prudent,
and of a perception which did not suffer itself to be baulked or
misled by any pretences of others, or any superstition or any heat
or haste of his own. "My hand of iron," he said, "was not at the
extremity of my arm, it was immediately connected with my head." He
respected the power of nature and fortune, and ascribed to it his
superiority, instead of valuing himself, like inferior men, on his
opinionativeness, and waging war with nature. His favorite rhetoric
lay in allusion to his star; and he pleased himself, as well as the
people, when he styled himself the "Child of Destiny." "They charge
me," he said, "with the commission of great crimes: men of my stamp do
not commit crimes. Nothing has been more simple than my elevation,
'tis in vain to ascribe it to intrigue or crime; it was owing to the
peculiarity of the times and to my reputation of having fought well
against the enemies of my country. I have always marched with the
opinion of great masses and with events. Of what use then would crimes
be to me?" Again he said, speaking of his son, "My son can not replace
me; I could not replace myself. I am the creature of circumstances."

  He had a directness of action never before combined with so much
comprehension. He is a realist, terrific to all talkers and confused
truth-obscuring persons. He sees where the matter hinges, throws
himself on the precise point of resistance, and slights all other
considerations. He is strong in the right manner, namely by insight.
He never blundered into victory, but won his battles in his head
before he won them on the field. His principal means are in himself.
He asks counsel of no other. In 1796 he writes to the Directory: "I
have conducted the campaign without consulting any one. I should
have done no good if I had been under the necessity of conforming to
the notions of another person. I have gained some advantages over
superior forces and when totally destitute of every thing, because, in
the persuasion that your confidence was reposed in me, my actions were
as prompt as my thoughts."

  History is full, down to this day, of the imbecility of kings and
governors. They are a class of persons much to be pitied, for they
know not what they should do. The weavers strike for bread, and the
king and his ministers, knowing not what to do, meet them with
bayonets. But Napoleon understood his business. Here was a man who
in each moment and emergency knew what to do next. It is an immense
comfort and refreshment to the spirits, not only of kings, but of
citizens. Few men have any next; they live from hand to mouth, without
plan, and are ever at the end of their line, and after each action
wait for an impulse from abroad. Napoleon had been the first man of
the world, if his ends had been purely public. As he is, he inspires
confidence and vigor by the extraordinary unity of his action. He is
firm, sure, self-denying, self-postponing, sacrificing every thing,-
money, troops, generals, and his own safety also, to his aim; not
misled, like common adventurers, by the splendor of his own means.
"Incidents ought not to govern policy," he said, "but policy,
incidents." "To be hurried away by every event is to have no political
system at all." His victories were only so many doors, and he never
for a moment lost sight of his way onward, in the dazzle and uproar of
the present circumstance. He knew what to do, and he flew to his mark.
He would shorten a straight line to come at his object. Horrible
anecdotes may no doubt be collected from his history, of the price
at which he bought his successes; but he must not therefore be set
down as cruel, but only as one who knew no impediment to his will; not
bloodthirsty, not cruel,- but woe to what thing or person stood in his
way! Not bloodthirsty, but not sparing of blood,- and pitiless. He saw
only the object: the obstacle must give way. "Sire, General Clarke can
not combine with General Junot, for the dreadful fire of the
Austrian battery."- "Let him carry the battery."- "Sire, every
regiment that approaches the heavy artillery is sacrificed: Sire, what
orders?"- "Forward, forward!" Seruzier, a colonel of artillery, gives,
in his "Military Memoirs," the following sketch of a scene after the
battle of Austerlitz.- "At the moment in which the Russian army was
making its retreat, painfully, but in good order, on the ice of the
lake, the Emperor Napoleon came riding at full speed toward the
artillery. 'You are losing time,' he cried; 'fire upon those masses;
they must be engulfed: fire upon the ice!' The order remained
unexecuted for ten minutes. In vain several officers and myself were
placed on the slope of a hill to produce the effect: their balls and
mine rolled upon the ice without breaking it up. Seeing that, I
tried a simple method of elevating light howitzers. The almost
perpendicular fall of the heavy projectiles produced the desired
effect. My method was immediately followed by the adjoining batteries,
and in less than no time we buried" some "thousands of Russians and
Austrians under the waters of the lake."

  In the plenitude of his resources, every obstacle seemed to
vanish. "There shall be no Alps," he said; and he built his perfect
roads, climbing by graded galleries their steepest precipices, until
Italy was as open to Paris as any town in France. He laid his bones
to, and wrought for his crown. Having decided what was to be done,
he did that with might and main. He put out all his strength. He
risked every thing and spared nothing, neither ammunition, nor
money, nor troops, nor generals, nor himself.

  We like to see every thing do its office after its kind, whether
it be a milch-cow or a rattlesnake; and if fighting be the best mode
of adjusting national differences, (as large majorities of men seem to
agree,) certainly Bonaparte was right in making it thorough. The grand
principle of war, he said, was that an army ought always to be
ready, by day and by night and at all hours, to make all the
resistance it is capable of making. He never economized his
ammunition, but, on a hostile position, rained a torrent of iron,-
shells, balls, grape-shot,- to annihilate all defence. On any point of
resistance he concentrated squadron on squadron in overwhelming
numbers until it was swept out of existence. To a regiment of
horse-chasseurs at Lobenstein, two days before the battle of Jena,
Napoleon said, "My lads, you must not fear death; when soldiers
brave death, they drive him into the enemy's ranks." In the fury of
assault, he no more spared himself. He went to the edge of his
possibility. It is plain that in Italy he did what he could, and all
that he could. He came, several times, within an inch of ruin; and his
own person was all but lost. He was flung into the marsh at Arcola.
The Austrians were between him and his troops, in the melee, and he
was brought off with desperate efforts. At Lonato, and at other
places, he was on the point of being taken prisoner. He fought sixty
battles. He had never enough. Each victory was a new weapon. "My power
would fall, were I not to support it by new achievements. Conquest has
made me what I am, and conquest must maintain me." He felt, with every
wise man, that as much life is needed for conservation as for
creation. We are always in peril, always in a bad plight, just on
the edge of destruction and only to be saved by invention and courage.

  This vigor was guarded and tempered by the coldest prudence and
punctuality. A thunderbolt in the attack, he was found invulnerable in
his intrenchments. His very attack was never the inspiration of
courage, but the result of calculation. His idea of the best defence
consists in being still the attacking party. "My ambition," he says,
"was great, but was of a cold nature." In one of his conversations
with Las Cases, he remarked, "As to moral courage, I have rarely met
with the two-o'clock-in-the-morning kind: I mean unprepared courage;
that which is necessary on an unexpected occasion, and which, in spite
of the most unforeseen events, leaves full freedom of judgment and
decision": and he did not hesitate to declare that he was himself
eminently endowed with this two-o'clock-in-the-morning courage, and
that he had met with few persons equal to himself in this respect.

  Every thing depended on the nicety of his combinations, and the
stars were not more punctual than his arithmetic. His personal
attention descended to the smallest particulars. "At Montebello, I
ordered Kellermann to attack with eight hundred horse, and with
these he separated the six thousand Hungarian grenadiers, before the
very eyes of the Austrian cavalry. This cavalry was half a league
off and required a quarter of an hour to arrive on the field of
action, and I have observed that it is always these quarters of an
hour that decide the fate of a battle." "Before he fought a battle,
Bonaparte thought little about what he should do in case of success,
but a great deal about what he should do in case of a reverse of
fortune." The same prudence and good sense mark all his behavior.
His instructions to his secretary at the Tuileries are worth
remembering. "During the night, enter my chamber as seldom as
possible. Do not awake me when you have any good news to
communicate; with that there is no hurry. But when you bring bad news,
rouse me instantly, for then there is not a moment to be lost." It was
a whimsical economy of the same kind which dictated his practice, when
general in Italy, in regard to his burdensome correspondence. He
directed Bourrienne to leave all letters unopened for three weeks, and
then observed with satisfaction how large a part of the correspondence
had thus disposed of itself and no longer required an answer. His
achievement of business was immense, and enlarges the known powers
of man. There have been many working kings, from Ulysses to William of
Orange, but none who accomplished a tithe of this man's performance.

  To these gifts of nature, Napoleon added the advantage of having
been born to a private and humble fortune. In his later days he had
the weakness of wishing to add to his crowns and badges the
prescription of aristocracy; but he knew his debt to his austere
education, and made no secret of his contempt for the born kings,
and for "the hereditary asses," as he coarsely styled the Bourbons. He
said that "in their exile they had learned nothing, and forgot
nothing." Bonaparte had passed through all the degrees of military
service, but also was citizen before he was emperor, and so has the
key to citizenship. His remarks and estimates discover the information
and justness of measurement of the middle class. Those who had to deal
with him found that he was not to be imposed upon, but could cipher as
well as another man. This appears in all parts of his Memoirs,
dictated at St. Helena. When the expenses of the empress, of his
household, of his palaces, had accumulated great debts, Napoleon
examined the bills of the creditors himself, detected overcharges
and errors, and reduced the claims by considerable sums.

  His grand weapon, namely the millions whom he directed, he owed to
the representative character which clothed him. He interests us as
he stands for France and for Europe; and he exists as captain and king
only as far as the Revolution, or the interest of the industrious
masses, found an organ and a leader in him. In the social interests,
he knew the meaning and value of labor, and threw himself naturally on
that side. I like an incident mentioned by one of his biographers at
St. Helena. "When walking with Mrs. Balcombe, some servants,
carrying heavy boxes, passed by on the road, and Mrs. Balcombe desired
them, in rather an angry tone, to keep back. Napoleon interfered,
saying 'Respect the burden, Madam.'" In the time of the empire he
directed attention to the improvement and embellishment of the markets
of the capital. "The market-place," he said, "is the Louvre of the
common people." The principal works that have survived him are his
magnificent roads. He filled the troops with his spirit, and a sort of
freedom and companionship grew up between him and them, which the
forms of his court never permitted between the officers and himself.
They performed, under his eye, that which no others could do. The best
document of his relation to his troops is the order of the day on
the morning of the battle of Austerlitz, in which Napoleon promises
the troops that he will keep his person out of reach of fire. This
declaration, which is the reverse of that ordinarily made by
generals and sovereigns on the eve of a battle, sufficiently
explains the devotion of the army to their leader.

  But though there is in particulars this identity between Napoleon
and the mass of the people, his real strength lay in their
conviction that he was their representative in his genius and aims,
not only when he courted, but when he controlled, and even when he
decimated them by his conscriptions. He knew, as well as any Jacobin
in France, how to philosophize on liberty and equality; and when
allusion was made to the precious blood of centuries, which was
spilled by the killing of the Duc d'Enghien, he suggested, "Neither is
my blood ditchwater." The people felt that no longer the throne was
occupied and the land sucked of its nourishment, by a small class of
legitimates, secluded from all community with the children of the
soil, and holding the ideas and superstitions of a long-forgotten
state of society. Instead of that vampyre, a man of themselves held,
in the Tuileries, knowledge and ideas like their own, opening of
course to them and their children all places of power and trust. The
day of sleepy, selfish policy, ever narrowing the means and
opportunities of young men, was ended, and a day of expansion and
demand was come. A market for all the powers and productions of man
was opened; brilliant prizes glittered in the eyes of youth and
talent. The old, iron-bound, feudal France was changed into a young
Ohio or New York; and those who smarted under the immediate rigors
of the new monarch, pardoned them as the necessary severities of the
military system which had driven out the oppressor. And even when
the majority of the people had begun to ask whether they had really
gained any thing under the exhausting levies of men and money of the
new master, the whole talent of the country, in every rank and
kindred, took his part and defended him as its natural patron. In
1814, when advised to rely on the higher classes, Napoleon said to
those around him, "Gentlemen, in the situation in which I stand, my
only nobility is the rabble of the Faubourgs."

  Napoleon met this natural expectation. The necessity of his position
required a hospitality to every sort of talent, and its appointment to
trusts; and his feeling went along with this policy. Like every
superior person, he undoubtedly felt a desire for men and compeers,
and a wish to measure his power with other masters, and an
impatience of fools and underlings. In Italy, he sought for men and
found none. "Good God!" he said, "how rare men are! There are eighteen
millions in Italy, and I have with difficulty found two,- Dandolo
and Melzi." In later years, with larger experience, his respect for
mankind was not increased. In a moment of bitterness he said to one of
his oldest friends, "Men deserve the contempt with which they
inspire me. I have only to put some gold-lace on the coat of my
virtuous republicans and they immediately become just what I wish
them." This impatience at levity was, however, an oblique tribute of
respect to those able persons who commanded his regard not only when
he found them friends and coadjutors but also when they resisted his
will. He could not confound Fox and Pitt, Carnot, Lafayette and
Bernadotte, with the danglers of his court; and in spite of the
detraction which his systematic egotism dictated toward the great
captains who conquered with and for him, ample acknowledgments are
made by him to Lannes, Duroc, Kleber, Dessaix, Massena, Murat, Ney and
Augereau. If he felt himself their patron and the founder of their
fortunes, as when he said, "I made my generals out of mud,"- he
could not hide his satisfaction in receiving from them a seconding and
support commensurate with the grandeur of his enterprise. In the
Russian campaign he was so much impressed by the courage and resources
of Marshal Ney, that he said, "I have two hundred millions in my
coffers, and I would give them all for Ney." The characters which he
has drawn of several of his marshals are discriminating, and though
they did not content the insatiable vanity of French officers, are
no doubt substantially just. And in fact every species of merit was
sought and advanced under his government. "I know," he said, "the
depth and draught of water of every one of my generals." Natural power
was sure to be well received at his court. Seventeen men in his time
were raised from common soldiers to the rank of king, marshal, duke,
or general; and the crosses of his Legion of Honor were given to
personal valor, and not to family connexion. "When soldiers have
been baptized in the fire of a battlefield, they have all one rank
in my eyes."

  When a natural king becomes a titular king, every body is pleased
and satisfied. The Revolution entitled the strong populace of the
Faubourg St. Antoine, and every horse-boy and powder-monkey in the
army, to look on Napoleon as flesh of his flesh and the creature of
his party: but there is something in the success of grand talent which
enlists an universal sympathy. For in the prevalence of sense and
spirit over stupidity and malversation, all reasonable men have an
interest; and as intellectual beings we feel the air purified by the
electric shock, when material force is overthrown by intellectual
energies. As soon as we are removed out of the reach of local and
accidental partialities, Man feels that Napoleon fights for him; these
are honest victories; this strong steam-engine does our work. Whatever
appeals to the imagination, by transcending the ordinary limits of
human ability, wonderfully encourages us and liberates us. This
capacious head, revolving and disposing sovereignly trains of affairs,
and animating such multitudes of agents; this eye, which looked
through Europe; this prompt invention; this inexhaustible resource:-
what events! what romantic pictures! what strange situations!- when
spying the Alps, by a sunset in the Sicilian sea; drawing up his
army for battle in sight of the Pyramids, and saying to his troops,
"From the tops of those pyramids, forty centuries look down on you";
fording the Red Sea; wading in the gulf of the Isthmus of Suez. On the
shore of Ptolemais, gigantic projects agitated him. "Had Acre
fallen, I should have changed the face of the world." His army, on the
night of the battle of Austerlitz, which was the anniversary of his
inauguration as Emperor, presented him with a bouquet of forty
standards taken in the fight. Perhaps it is a little puerile, the
pleasure he took in making these contrasts glaring; as when he pleased
himself with making kings wait in his antechambers, at Tilsit, at
Paris and at Erfurt.

  We can not, in the universal imbecility, indecision and indolence of
men, sufficiently congratulate ourselves on this strong and ready
actor, who took occasion by the beard, and showed us how much may be
accomplished by the mere force of such virtues as all men possess in
less degrees; namely, by punctuality, by personal attention, by
courage and thoroughness. "The Austrians," he said, "do not know the
value of time." I should cite him, in his earlier years, as a model of
prudence. His power does not consist in any wild or extravagant force;
in any enthusiasm like Mahomet's, or singular power of persuasion; but
in the exercise of common-sense on each emergency, instead of
abiding by rules and customs. The lesson he teaches is that which
vigor always teaches;- that there is always room for it. To what heaps
of cowardly doubts is not that man's life an answer. When he
appeared it was the belief of all military men that there could be
nothing new in war; as it is the belief of men to-day that nothing new
can be undertaken in politics, or in church, or in letters, or in
trade, or in farming, or in our social manners and customs; and as
it is at all times the belief of society that the world is used up.
But Bonaparte knew better than society; and moreover knew that he knew
better. I think all men know better than they do; know that the
institutions we so volubly commend are go-carts and baubles; but
they dare not trust their presentiments. Bonaparte relied on his own
sense, and did not care a bean for other people's. The world treated
his novelties just as it treats everybody's novelties,- made
infinite objection, mustered all the impediments; but he snapped his
finger at their objections. "What creates great difficulty," he
remarks, "in the profession of the land-commander, is the necessity of
feeding so many men and animals. If he allows himself to be guided
by the commissaries he will never stir, and all his expeditions will
fail." An example of his common-sense is what he says of the passage
of the Alps in winter, which all writers, one repeating after the
other, had described as impracticable. "The winter," says Napoleon,
"is not the most unfavorable season for the passage of lofty
mountains. The snow is then firm, the weather settled, and there is
nothing to fear from avalanches, the real and only danger to be
apprehended in the Alps. On these high mountains there are often
very fine days in December, of a dry cold, with extreme calmness in
the air." Read his account, too, of the way in which battles are
gained. "In all battles a moment occurs when the bravest troops, after
having made the greatest efforts, feel inclined to run. That terror
proceeds from a want of confidence in their own courage, and it only
requires a slight opportunity, a pretence, to restore confidence to
them. The art is, to give rise to the opportunity and to invent the
pretence. At Arcola I won the battle with twenty-five horsemen. I
seized that moment of lassitude, gave every man a trumpet, and
gained the day with this handful. You see that two armies are two
bodies which meet and endeavor to frighten each other; a moment of
panic occurs, and that moment must be turned to advantage. When a
man has been present in many actions, he distinguishes that moment
without difficulty: it is as easy as casting up an addition."

  This deputy of the nineteenth century added to his gifts a
capacity for speculation on general topics. He delighted in running
through the range of practical, of literary and of abstract questions.
His opinion is always original and to the purpose. On the voyage to
Egypt he liked, after dinner, to fix on three or four persons to
support a proposition, and as many to oppose it. He gave a subject,
and the discussions turned on questions of religion, the different
kinds of government, and the art of war. One day he asked whether
the planets were inhabited? On another, what was the age of the world?
Then he proposed to consider the probability of the destruction of the
globe, either by water or by fire: at another time, the truth or
fallacy of presentiments, and the interpretation of dreams. He was
very fond of talking of religion. In 1806 he conversed with
Fournier, bishop of Montpellier, on matters of theology. There were
two points on which they could not agree, viz. that of hell, and
that of salvation out of the pale of the church. The Emperor told
Josephine that he disputed like a devil on these two points, on
which the bishop was inexorable. To the philosophers he readily
yielded all that was proved against religion as the work of men and
time, but he would not hear of materialism. One fine night, on deck,
amid a clatter of materialism, Bonaparte pointed to the stars, and
said, "You may talk as long as you please, gentlemen, but who made all
that?" He delighted in the conversation of men of science,
particularly of Monge and Berthollet; but the men of letters he
slighted; they were "manufacturers of phrases." Of medicine too he was
fond of talking, and with those of its practitioners whom he most
esteemed,- with Corvisart at Paris, and with Antonomarchi at St.
Helena. "Believe me," he said to the last, "we had better leave off
all these remedies: life is a fortress which neither you nor I know
any thing about. Why throw obstacles in the way of its defence? Its
own means are superior to all the apparatus of your laboratories.
Corvisart candidly agreed with me that all your filthy mixtures are
good for nothing. Medicine is a collection of uncertain prescriptions,
the results of which, taken collectively, are more fatal than useful
to mankind. Water, air and cleanliness are the chief articles in my
pharmacopoeia."

  His memoirs, dictated to Count Montholon and General Gourgaud at St.
Helena, have great value, after all the deduction that it seems is
to be made from them on account of his known disingenuousness. He
has the good-nature of strength and conscious superiority. I admire
his simple, clear narrative of his battles;- good as Caesar's; his
good-natured and sufficiently respectful account of Marshal Wurmser
and his other antagonists; and his own equality as a writer to his
varying subject. The most agreeable portion is the Campaign in Egypt.

  He had hours of thought and wisdom. In intervals of leisure,
either in the camp or the palace, Napoleon appears as a man of
genius directing on abstract questions the native appetite for truth
and the impatience of words he was wont to show in war. He could enjoy
every play of invention, a romance, a bon mot, as well as a
strategem in a campaign. He delighted to fascinate Josephine and her
ladies, in a dim-lighted apartment, by the terrors of a fiction to
which his voice and dramatic power lent every addition.

  I call Napoleon the agent or attorney of the middle class of
modern society; of the throng who fill the markets, shops,
counting-houses, manufactories, ships, of the modern world, aiming
to be rich. He was the agitator, the destroyer of prescription, the
internal improver, the liberal, the radical, the inventor of means,
the opener of doors and markets, the subverter of monopoly and
abuse. Of course the rich and aristocratic did not like him.
England, the centre of capital, and Rome and Austria, centres of
tradition and genealogy, opposed him. The consternation of the dull
and conservative classes, the terror of the foolish old men and old
women of the Roman conclave, who in their despair took hold of any
thing, and would cling to red-hot iron,- the vain attempts of statists
to amuse and deceive him, of the emperor of Austria to bribe him;
and the instinct of the young, ardent and active men every where,
which pointed him out as the giant of the middle class, make his
history bright and commanding. He had the virtues of the masses of his
constituents: he had also their vices. I am sorry that the brilliant
picture has its reverse. But that is the fatal quality which we
discover in our pursuit of wealth, that it is treacherous, and is
bought by the breaking or weakening of the sentiments; and it is
inevitable that we should find the same fact in the history of this
champion, who proposed to himself simply a brilliant career, without
any stipulation or scruple concerning the means.

  Bonaparte was singularly destitute of generous sentiments. The
highest-placed individual in the most cultivated age and population of
the world,- he has not the merit of common truth and honesty. He is
unjust to his generals; egotistic and monopolizing; meanly stealing
the credit of their great actions from Kellermann, from Bernadotte;
intriguing to involve his faithful Junot in hopeless bankruptcy, in
order to drive him to a distance from Paris, because the familiarity
of his manners offends the new pride of his throne. He is a
boundless liar. The official paper, his "Moniteur," and all his
bulletins, are proverbs for saying what he wished to be believed;
and worse,- he sat, in his premature old age, in his lonely island,
coldly falsifying facts and dates and characters, and giving to
history a theatrical eclat. Like all Frenchmen he has a passion for
stage effect. Every action that breathes of generosity is poisoned
by this calculation. His star, his love of glory, his doctrine of
the immortality of the soul, are all French. "I must dazzle and
astonish. If I were to give the liberty of the press, my power could
not last three days." To make a great noise is his favorite design. "A
great reputation is a great noise: the more there is made, the farther
off it is heard. Laws, institutions, monuments, nations, all fall; but
the noise continues, and resounds in after ages." His doctrine of
immortality is simply fame. His theory of influence is not flattering.
"There are two levers for moving men,- interest and fear. Love is a
silly infatuation, depend upon it. Friendship is but a name. I love
nobody. I do not even love my brothers: perhaps Joseph a little,
from habit, and because he is my elder; and Duroc, I love him too; but
why?- because his character pleases me: he is stern and resolute,
and I believe the fellow never shed a tear. For my part I know very
well that I have no true friends. As long as I continue to be what I
am, I may have as many pretended friends as I please. Leave
sensibility to women; but men should be firm in heart and purpose,
or they should have nothing to do with war and government." He was
thoroughly unscrupulous. He would steal, slander, assassinate, drown
and poison, as his interest dictated. He had no generosity, but mere
vulgar hatred; he was intensely selfish; he was perfidious; he cheated
at cards; he was a prodigious gossip, and opened letters, and
delighted in his infamous police, and rubbed his hands with joy when
he had intercepted some morsel of intelligence concerning the men
and women about him, boasting that "he knew every thing"; and
interfered with the cutting the dresses of the women; and listened
after the hurrahs and the compliments of the street, incognito. His
manners were coarse. He treated women with low familiarity. He had the
habit of pulling their ears and pinching their cheeks when he was in
good humor, and of pulling the ears and whiskers of men, and of
striking and horse-play with them, to his last days. It does not
appear that he listened at key-holes, or at least that he was caught
at it. In short, when you have penetrated through all the circles of
power and splendor, you were not dealing with a gentleman, at last;
but with an impostor and a rogue; and he fully deserves the epithet of
Jupiter Scapin, or a sort of Scamp Jupiter.

  In describing the two parties into which modern society divides
itself,- the democrat and the conservative,- I said, Bonaparte
represents the democrat, or the party of men of business, against
the stationary or conservative party. I omitted then to say, what is
material to the statement, namely that these two parties differ only
as young and old. The democrat is a young conservative; the
conservative is an old democrat. The aristocrat is the democrat ripe
and gone to seed;- because both parties stand on the one ground of the
supreme value of property, which one endeavors to get, and the other
to keep. Bonaparte may be said to represent the whole history of
this party, its youth and its age; yes, and with poetic justice its
fate, in his own. The counter-revolution, the counter-party, still
waits for its organ and representative, in a lover and a man of
truly public and universal aims.

  Here was an experiment, under the most favorable conditions, of
the powers of intellect without conscience. Never was such a leader so
endowed and so weaponed; never leader found such aids and followers.
And what was the result of this vast talent and power, of these
immense armies, burned cities, squandered treasures, immolated
millions of men, of this demoralized Europe? It came to no result. All
passed away like the smoke of his artillery, and left no trace. He
left France smaller, poorer, feebler, than he found it; and the
whole contest for freedom was to be begun again. The attempt was in
principle suicidal. France served him with life and limb and estate,
as long as it could identify its interest with him; but when men saw
that after victory was another war; after the destruction of armies,
new conscriptions; and they who had toiled so desperately were never
nearer to the reward,- they could not spend what they had earned,
nor repose on their down-beds, nor strut in their chateaux,- they
deserted him. Men found that his absorbing egotism was deadly to all
other men. It resembled the torpedo, which inflicts a succession of
shocks on any one who takes hold of it, producing spasms which
contract the muscles of the hand, so that the man can not open his
fingers; and the animal inflicts new and more violent shocks, until he
paralyzes and kills his victim. So this exorbitant egotist narrowed,
impoverished and absorbed the power and existence of those who
served him; and the universal cry of France and of Europe in 1814 was,
"Enough of him"; "Assez de Bonaparte."

  It was not Bonaparte's fault. He did all that in him lay to live and
thrive without moral principle. It was the nature of things, the
eternal law of man and of the world which baulked and ruined him;
and the result, in a million experiments, will be the same. Every
experiment, by multitudes or by individuals, that has a sensual and
selfish aim, will fail. The pacific Fourier will be as inefficient
as the pernicious Napoleon. As long as our civilization is essentially
one of property, of fences, of exclusiveness, it will be mocked by
delusions. Our riches will leave us sick; there will be bitterness
in our laughter, and our wine will burn our mouth. Only that good
profits which we can taste with all doors open, and which serves all
men.
GOETHE

                         GOETHE

                     or, The Writer

  I FIND a provision in the constitution of the world for the
writer, or secretary, who is to report the doings of the miraculous
spirit of life that everywhere throbs and works. His office is a
reception of the facts into the mind, and then a selection of the
eminent and characteristic experiences.

  Nature will be reported. All things are engaged in writing their
history. The planet, the pebble, goes attended by its shadow. The
rolling rock leaves its scratches on the mountain; the river its
channel in the soil; the animal its bones in the stratum; the fern and
leaf their modest epitaph in the coal. The falling drop makes its
sculpture in the sand or the stone. Not a foot steps into the snow
or along the ground, but prints, in characters more or less lasting, a
map of its march. Every act of the man inscribes itself in the
memories of his fellows and in his own manners and face. The air is
full of sounds; the sky, of tokens; the round is all memoranda and
signatures, and every object covered over with hints which speak to
the intelligent.

  In nature, this self-registration is incessant, and the narrative is
the print of the seal. It neither exceeds nor comes short of the fact.
But nature strives upward; and, in man, the report is something more
than print of the seal. It is a new and finer form of the original.
The record is alive, as that which it recorded is alive. In man, the
memory is a kind of looking-glass, which, having received the images
of surrounding objects, is touched with life, and disposes them in a
new order. The facts do not lie in it inert; but some subside and
others shine; so that we soon have a new picture, composed of the
eminent experiences. The man cooperates. He loves to communicate;
and that which is for him to say lies as a load on his heart until
it is delivered. But, besides the universal joy of conversation,
some men are born with exalted powers for this second creation. Men
are born to write. The gardener saves every slip and seed and
peach-stone: his vocation is to be a planter of plants. Not less
does the writer attend his affair. Whatever he beholds or experiences,
comes to him as a model and sits for its picture. He counts it all
nonsense that they say, that some things are undescribable. He
believes that all that can be thought can be written, first or last;
and he would report the Holy Ghost, or attempt it. Nothing so broad,
so subtle, or so dear, but comes therefore commended to his pen, and
he will write. In his eyes, a man is the faculty of reporting, and the
universe is the possibility of being reported. In conversation, in
calamity, he finds new materials; as our German poet said, "Some god
gave me the power to paint what I suffer." He draws his rents from
rage and pain. By acting rashly, he buys the power of talking
wisely. Vexations and a tempest of passion only fill his sail; as
the good Luther writes, "When I am angry, I can pray well and preach
well": and, if we knew the genesis of fine strokes of eloquence,
they might recall the complaisance of Sultan Amurath, who struck off
some Persian heads, that his physician, Vesalius, might see the spasms
in the muscles of the neck. His failures are the preparation of his
victories. A new thought or a crisis of passion apprises him that
all that he has yet learned and written is exoteric,- is not the fact,
but some rumor of the fact. What then? Does he throw away the pen? No;
he begins again to describe in the new light which has shined on him,-
if, by some means, he may yet save some true word. Nature conspires.
Whatever can be thought can be spoken, and still rises for
utterance, though to rude and stammering organs. If they can not
compass it, it waits and works, until at last it moulds them to its
perfect will and is articulated.

  This striving after imitative expression, which one meets every
where, is significant of the aim of nature, but is mere stenography.
There are higher degrees, and nature has more splendid endowments
for those whom she elects to a superior office; for the class of
scholars or writers, who see connection where the multitude see
fragments, and who are impelled to exhibit the facts in order, and
so to supply the axis on which the frame of things turns. Nature has
dearly at heart the formation of the speculative man, or scholar. It
is an end never lost sight of, and is prepared in the original casting
of things. He is no permissive or accidental appearance, but an
organic agent, one of the estates of the realm, provided and
prepared from of old and from everlasting, in the knitting and
contexture of things. Presentiments, impulses, cheer him. There is a
certain heat in the breast which attends the perception of a primary
truth, which is the shining of the spiritual sun down into the shaft
of the mine. Every thought which dawns on the mine, in the moment of
its emergence announces its own rank,- whether it is some whimsy, or
whether it is a power.

  If he have his incitements, there is, on the other side,
invitation and need enough of his gift. Society has, at all times, the
same want, namely of one sane man with adequate powers of expression
to hold up each object of monomania in its right relations. The
ambitious and mercenary bring their last new mumbo-jumbo, whether
tariff, Texas, railroad, Romanism, mesmerism, or California; and, by
detaching the object from its relations, easily succeed in making it
seen in a glare; and a multitude go mad about it, and they are not
to be reproved or cured by the opposite multitude who are kept from
this particular insanity by an equal frenzy on another crotchet. But
let one man have the comprehensive eye that can replace this
isolated prodigy in its right neighborhood and bearings,- the illusion
vanishes, and the returning reason of the community thanks the
reason of the monitor.

  The scholar is the man of the ages, but he must also wish with other
men to stand well with his contemporaries. But there is a certain
ridicule, among superficial people, thrown on the scholars or clerisy,
which is of no import unless the scholar heed it. In this country, the
emphasis of conversation and of public opinion commends the
practical man; and the solid portion of the community is named with
significant respect in every circle. Our people are of Bonaparte's
opinion concerning ideologists. Ideas are subversive of social order
and comfort, and at last make a fool of the possessor. It is believed,
the ordering a cargo of goods from New York to Smyrna, or the
running up and down to procure a company of subscribers to set a-going
five or ten thousand spindles, or the negotiations of a caucus and the
practising on the prejudices and facility of country-people to
secure their votes in November,- is practical and commendable.

  If I were to compare action of a much higher strain with a life of
contemplation, I should not venture to pronounce with much
confidence in favor of the former. Mankind have such a deep stake in
inward illumination, that there is much to be said by the hermit or
monk in defence of his life of thought and prayer. A certain
partiality, a headiness and loss of balance, is the tax which all
action must pay. Act, if you like,- but you do it at your peril. Men's
actions are too strong for them. Show me a man who has acted and who
has not been the victim and slave of his action. What they have done
commits and enforces them to do the same again. The first act, which
was to be an experiment, becomes a sacrament. The fiery reformer
embodies his aspiration in some rite or covenant, and he and his
friends cleave to the form and lose the aspiration. The Quaker has
established Quakerism, the Shaker has established his monastery and
his dance; and although each prates of spirit, there is no spirit, but
repetition, which is anti-spiritual. But where are his new things of
to-day? In actions of enthusiasm this drawback appears, but in those
lower activities, which have no higher aim than to make us more
comfortable and more cowardly; in actions of cunning, actions that
steal and lie, actions that divorce the speculative from the practical
faculty and put a ban on reason and sentiment, there is nothing else
but drawback and negation. The Hindoos write in their sacred books,
"Children only, and not the learned, speak of the speculative and
the practical faculties as two. They are but one, for both obtain
the selfsame end, and the place which is gained by the followers of
the one is gained by the followers of the other. That man seeth, who
seeth that the speculative and the practical doctrines are one." For
great action must draw on the spiritual nature. The measure of
action is the sentiment from which it proceeds. The greatest action
may easily be one of the most private circumstance.

  This disparagement will not come from the leaders, but from inferior
persons. The robust gentlemen who stand at the head of the practical
class, share the ideas of the time, and have too much sympathy with
the speculative class. It is not from men excellent in any kind that
disparagement of any other is to be looked for. With such,
Talleyrand's question is ever the main one; not, is he rich? is he
committed? is he well-meaning? has he this or that faculty? is he of
the movement? is he of the establishment?- but, Is he anybody? does he
stand for something? He must be good of his kind. That is all that
Talleyrand, all that State-street, all that the common-sense of
mankind asks. Be real and admirable, not as we know, but as you
know. Able men do not care in what kind a man is able, so only that he
is able. A master likes a master, and does not stipulate whether it be
orator, artist, craftsman, or king.

  Society has really no graver interest than the well-being of the
literary class. And it is not to be denied that men are cordial in
their recognition and welcome of intellectual accomplishments. Still
the writer does not stand with us on any commanding ground. I think
this to be his own fault. A pound passes for a pound. There have
been times when he was a sacred person: he wrote Bibles, the first
hymns, the codes, the epics, tragic songs, Sibylline verses,
Chaldean oracles, Laconian sentences, inscribed on temple walls. Every
word was true, and woke the nations to new life. He wrote without
levity and without choice. Every word was carved before his eyes
into the earth and the sky; and the sun and stars were only letters of
the same purport and of no more necessity. But how can he be honored
when he does not honor himself; when he loses himself in a crowd; when
he is no longer the lawgiver, but the sycophant, ducking to the
giddy opinion of a reckless public; when he must sustain with
shameless advocacy some bad government, or must bark, all the year
round, in opposition; or write conventional criticism, or profligate
novels, or at any rate write without thought, and without recurrence
by day and by night to the sources of inspiration?

  Some reply to these questions may be furnished by looking over the
list of men of literary genius in our age. Among these no more
instructive name occurs than that of Goethe to represent the powers
and duties of the scholar or writer.

  I described Bonaparte as a representative of the popular external
life and aims of the nineteenth century. Its other half, its poet,
is Goethe, a man quite domesticated in the century, breathing its air,
enjoying its fruits, impossible at any earlier time, and taking
away, by his colossal parts, the reproach of weakness which but for
him would lie on the intellectual works of the period. He appears at a
time when a general culture has spread itself and has smoothed down
all sharp individual traits; when, in the absence of heroic
characters, a social comfort and cooperation have come in. There is no
poet, but scores of poetic writers; no Columbus, but hundreds of
post-captains, with transit-telescope, barometer and concentrated soup
and pemmican; no Demosthenes, no Chatham, but any number of clever
parliamentary and forensic debaters; no prophet or saint, but colleges
of divinity; no learned man, but learned societies, a cheap press,
reading-rooms and book-clubs without number. There was never such a
miscellany of facts. The world extends itself like American trade.
We conceive Greek or Roman life, life in the Middle Ages, to be a
simple and comprehensible affair; but modern life to respect a
multitude of things, which is distracting.

  Goethe was the philosopher of this multiplicity; hundred-handed,
Argus-eyed, able and happy to cope with this rolling miscellany of
facts and sciences, and by his own versatility to dispose of them with
ease; a manly mind, unembarrassed by the variety of coats of
convention with which life had got encrusted, easily able by his
subtlety to pierce these and to draw his strength from nature, with
which he lived in full communion. What is strange too, he lived in a
small town, in a petty state, in a defeated state, and in a time
when Germany played no such leading part in the world's affairs as
to swell the bosom of her sons with any metropolitan pride, such as
might have cheered a French, or English, or once, a Roman or Attic
genius. Yet there is no trace of provincial limitation in his muse. He
is not a debtor to his position, but was born with a free and
controlling genius.

  The Helena, or the second part of Faust, is a philosophy of
literature set in poetry; the work of one who found himself the master
of histories, mythologies, philosophies, sciences and national
literatures, in the encyclopaedical manner in which modern
erudition, with its international intercourse of the whole earth's
population, researches into Indian, Etruscan and all Cyclopean arts;
geology, chemistry, astronomy; and every one of these kingdoms
assuming a certain aerial and poetic character, by reason of the
multitude. One looks at a king with reverence; but if one should
chance to be at a congress of kings, the eye would take liberties with
the peculiarities of each. These are not wild miraculous songs, but
elaborate forms to which the poet has confided the results of eighty
years of observation. This reflective and critical wisdom makes the
poem more truly the flower of this time. It dates itself. Still, he is
a poet,- poet of a prouder laurel than any contemporary, and, under
this plague of microscopes (for he seems to see out of every pore of
his skin), strikes the harp with a hero's strength and grace.

  The wonder of the book is its superior intelligence. In the
menstruum of this man's wit, the past and the present ages, and
their religions, politics and modes of thinking, are dissolved into
archetypes and ideas. What new mythologies sail through his head!
The Greeks said that Alexander went as far as Chaos; Goethe went, only
the other day, as far; and one step farther he hazarded, and brought
himself safe back.

  There is a heart-cheering freedom in his speculation. The immense
horizon which journeys with us lends its majesty to trifles and to
matters of convenience and necessity, as to solemn and festal
performances. He was the soul of his century. If that was learned, and
had become, by population, compact organization and drill of parts,
one great Exploring Expedition, accumulating a glut of facts and
fruits too fast for any hitherto-existing savans to classify,- this
man's mind had ample chambers for the distribution of all. He had a
power to unite the detached atoms again by their own law. He has
clothed our modern existence with poetry. Amid littleness and
detail, he detected the Genius of life, the old cunning Proteus,
nestling close beside us, and showed that the dulness and prose we
ascribe to the age was only another of his masks:-

         "His very flight is presence in disguise":*(32)

-that he had put off a gay uniform for a fatigue dress, and was not
a whit less vivacious or rich in Liverpool or the Hague than once in
Rome or Antioch. He sought him in public squares and main streets,
in boulevards and hotels; and, in the solidest kingdom of routine
and the senses, he showed the lurking daemonic power; that, in actions
of routine, a thread of mythology and fable spins itself: and this, by
tracing the pedigree of every usage and practice, every institution,
utensil and means, home to its origin in the structure of man. He
had an extreme impatience of conjecture and of rhetoric. "I have
guesses enough of my own; if a man write a book, let him set down only
what he knows." He writes in the plainest and lowest tone, omitting
a great deal more than he writes, and putting ever a thing for a word.
He has explained the distinction between the antique and the modern
spirit and art. He has defined art, its scope and laws. He has said
the best things about nature that ever were said. He treats nature
as the old philosophers, as the seven wise masters did,- and, with
whatever loss of French tabulation and dissection, poetry and humanity
remain to us; and they have some doctoral skill. Eyes are better on
the whole than telescopes or microscopes. He has contributed a key
to many parts of nature, through the rare turn for unity and
simplicity in his mind. Thus Goethe suggested the leading idea of
modern botany, that a leaf or the eye of a leaf is the unit of botany,
and that every part of a plant is only a transformed leaf to meet a
new condition; and, by varying the conditions, a leaf may be converted
into any other organ, and any other organ into a leaf. In like manner,
in osteology, he assumed that one vertebra of the spine might be
considered as the unit of the skeleton: the head was only the
uttermost vertebrae transformed. "The plant goes from knot to knot,
closing at last with the flower and the seed. So the tape-worm, the
caterpillar, goes from knot to knot and closes with the head. Man
and the higher animals are built up through the vertebrae, the
powers being concentrated in the head." In optics again he rejected
the artificial theory of seven colors, and considered that every color
was the mixture of light and darkness in new proportions. It is really
of very little consequence what topic he writes upon. He sees at every
pore, and has a certain gravitation towards truth. He will realize
what you say. He hates to be trifled with and to be made to say over
again some old wife's fable that has had possession of men's faith
these thousand years. He may as well see if it is true as another.
He sifts it. I am here, he would say, to be the measure and judge of
these things. Why should I take them on trust? And therefore what he
says of religion, of passion, of marriage, of manners, of property, of
paper-money, of periods of belief, of omens, of luck, or whatever
else, refuses to be forgotten.

  Take the most remarkable example that could occur of this tendency
to verify every term in popular use. The Devil had played an important
part in mythology in all times. Goethe would have no word that does
not cover a thing. The same measure will still serve: "I have never
heard of any crime which I might not have committed." So he flies at
the throat of this imp. He shall be real; he shall be modern; he shall
be European; he shall dress like a gentleman, and accept the
manners, and walk in the streets, and be well initiated in the life of
Vienna and of Heidelberg in 1820,- or he shall not exist. Accordingly,
he stripped him of mythologic gear, of horns, cloven foot, harpoon
tail, brimstone and blue-fire, and instead of looking in books and
pictures, looked for him in his own mind, in every shade of
coldness, selfishness and unbelief that, in crowds or in solitude,
darkens over the human thought,- and found that the portrait gained
reality and terror by every thing he added and by every thing he
took away. He found that the essence of this hobgoblin which had
hovered in shadow about the habitations of men ever since there were
men, was pure intellect, applied,- as always there is a tendency,-
to the service of the senses: and he flung into literature, in his
Mephistopheles, the first organic figure that has been added for
some ages, and which will remain as long as the Prometheus.

  I have no design to enter into any analysis of his numerous works.
They consist of translations, criticism, dramas, lyric and every other
description of poems, literary journals and portraits of distinguished
men. Yet I cannot omit to specify the Wilhelm Meister.

  Wilhelm Meister is a novel in every sense, the first of its kind,
called by its admirers the only delineation of modern society,- as
if other novels, those of Scott for example, dealt with costume and
condition, this with the spirit of life. It is a book over which
some veil is still drawn. It is read by very intelligent persons
with wonder and delight. It is preferred by some such to Hamlet, as
a work of genius. I suppose no book of this century can compare with
it in its delicious sweetness, so new, so provoking to the mind,
gratifying it with so many and so solid thoughts, just insights into
life and manners and characters; so many good hints for the conduct of
life, so many unexpected glimpses into a higher sphere, and never a
trace of rhetoric or dulness. A very provoking book to the curiosity
of young men of genius, but a very unsatisfactory one. Lovers of light
reading, those who look in it for the entertainment they find in a
romance, are disappointed. On the other hand, those who begin it
with the higher hope to read in it a worthy history of genius, and the
just award of the laurel to its toils and denials, have also reason to
complain. We had an English romance here, not long ago, professing
to embody the hope of a new age and to unfold the political hope of
the party called "Young England,"- in which the only reward of
virtue is a seat in Parliament and a peerage. Goethe's romance has a
conclusion as lame and immoral. George Sand, in Consuelo and its
continuation, has sketched a truer and more dignified picture. In
the progress of the story, the characters of the hero and heroine
expand at a rate that shivers the porcelain chess-table of
aristocratic convention: they quit the society and habits of their
rank, they lose their wealth, they become the servants of great
ideas and of the most generous social ends; until at last the hero,
who is the centre and fountain of an association for the rendering
of the noblest benefits to the human race, no longer answers to his
own titled name; it sounds foreign and remote in his ear. "I am only
man," he says; "I breathe and work for man"; and this in poverty and
extreme sacrifices. Goethe's hero, on the contrary, has so many
weaknesses and impurities and keeps such bad company, that the sober
English public, when the book was translated, were disgusted. And
yet it is so crammed with wisdom, with knowledge of the world and with
knowledge of laws; the persons so truly and subtly drawn, and with
such few strokes, and not a word too much,- the book remains ever so
new and unexhausted, that we must even let it go its way and be
willing to get what good from it we can, assured that it has only
begun its office and has millions of readers yet to serve.

  The argument is the passage of a democrat to the aristocracy,
using both words in their best sense. And this passage is not made
in any mean or creeping way, but through the hall door. Nature and
character assist, and the rank is made real by sense and probity in
the nobles. No generous youth can escape this charm of reality in
the book, so that it is highly stimulating to intellect and courage.

  The ardent and holy Novalis characterized the book as "thoroughly
modern and prosaic; the romantic is completely levelled in it; so is
the poetry of nature; the wonderful. The book treats only of the
ordinary affairs of men: it is a poeticized civic and domestic
story. The wonderful in it is expressly treated as fiction and
enthusiastic dreaming":- and yet, what is also characteristic, Novalis
soon returned to this book, and it remained his favorite reading to
the end of his life.

  What distinguishes Goethe for French and English readers is a
property which he shares with his nation,- a habitual reference to
interior truth. In England and in America there is a respect for
talent; and, if it is exerted in support of any ascertained or
intelligible interest or party, or in regular opposition to any, the
public is satisfied. In France there is even a greater delight in
intellectual brilliancy for its own sake. And in all these
countries, men of talent write from talent. It is enough if the
understanding is occupied, the taste propitiated,- so many columns, so
many hours, filled in a lively and creditable way. The German
intellect wants the French sprightliness, the fine practical
understanding of the English, and the American adventure; but it has a
certain probity, which never rests in a superficial performance, but
asks steadily, To what end? A German public asks for a controlling
sincerity. Here is activity of thought; but what is it for? What
does the man mean? Whence, whence all these thoughts?

  Talent alone can not make a writer. There must be a man behind the
book; a personality which by birth and quality is pledged to the
doctrines there set forth, and which exists to see and state things
so, and not otherwise; holding things because they are things. If he
can not rightly express himself to-day, the same things subsist and
will open themselves to-morrow. There lies the burden on his mind,-
the burden of truth to be declared,- more or less understood; and it
constitutes his business and calling in the world to see those facts
through, and to make them known. What signifies that he trips and
stammers; that his voice is harsh or hissing; that his method or his
tropes are inadequate? That message will find method and imagery,
articulation and melody. Though he were dumb it would speak. If
not,- if there be no such God's word in the man,- what care we how
adroit, how fluent, how brilliant he is?

  It makes a great difference to the force of any sentence whether
there be a man behind it or no. In the learned journal, in the
influential newspaper, I discern no form; only some irresponsible
shadow; oftener some moneyed corporation, or some dangler who hopes,
in the mask and robes of his paragraph, to pass for somebody. But
through every clause and part of speech of a right book I meet the
eyes of the most determined of men; his force and terror inundate
every word; the commas and dashes are alive; so that the writing is
athletic and nimble,- can go far and live long.

  In England and America, one may be an adept in the writings of a
Greek or Latin poet, without any poetic taste or fire. That a man
has spent years on Plato and Proclus, does not afford a presumption
that he holds heroic opinions, or under-values the fashions of his
town. But the German nation have the most ridiculous good faith on
these subjects: the student, out of the lecture-room, still broods
on the lessons; and the professor can not divest himself of the
fancy that the truths of philosophy have some application to Berlin
and Munich. This earnestness enables them to outsee men of much more
talent. Hence almost all the valuable distinctions which are current
in higher conversation have been derived to us from Germany. But
whilst men distinguished for wit and learning, in England and
France, adopt their study and their side with a certain levity, and
are not understood to be very deeply engaged, from grounds of
character, to the topic or the part they espouse,- Goethe, the head
and body of the German nation, does not speak from talent, but the
truth shines through: he is very wise, though his talent often veils
his wisdom. However excellent his sentence is, he has somewhat
better in view. It awakens my curiosity. He has the formidable
independence which converse with truth gives: hear you, or forbear,
his fact abides; and your interest in the writer is not confined to
his story and he dismissed from memory when he has performed his
task creditably, as a baker when he has left his loaf; but his work is
the least part of him. The old Eternal Genius who built the world
has confided himself more to this man than to any other.

  I dare not say that Goethe ascended to the highest grounds from
which genius has spoken. He has not worshipped the highest unity; he
is incapable of a self-surrender to the moral sentiment. There are
nobler strains in poetry than any he has sounded. There are writers
poorer in talent, whose tone is purer, and more touches the heart.
Goethe can never be dear to men. His is not even the devotion to
pure truth; but to truth for the sake of culture. He has no aims
less large than the conquest of universal nature, of universal
truth, to be his portion: a man not to be bribed, nor deceived, nor
overawed; of a stoical self-command and self-denial, and having one
test for all men,- What can you teach me? All possessions are valued
by him for that only; rank, privileges, health, time, Being itself.

  He is the type of culture, the amateur of all arts and sciences
and events; artistic, but not artist; spiritual, but not spiritualist.
There is nothing he had not right to know: there is no weapon in the
armory of universal genius he did not take into his hand, but with
peremptory heed that he should not be for a moment prejudiced by his
instruments. He lays a ray of light under every fact, and between
himself and his dearest property. From him nothing was hid, nothing
withholden. The lurking daemons sat to him, and the saint who saw
the daemons; and the metaphysical elements took form. "Piety itself is
no aim, but only a means whereby through purest inward peace we may
attain to highest culture." And his penetration of every secret of the
fine arts will make Goethe still more statuesque. His affections
help him, like women employed by Cicero to worm out the secret of
conspirators. Enmities he has none. Enemy of him you may be,- if so
you shall teach him aught which your good-will can not, were it only
what experience will accrue from your ruin. Enemy and welcome, but
enemy on high terms. He can not hate anybody; his time is worth too
much. Temperamental antagonisms may be suffered, but like feuds of
emperors, who fight dignifiedly across kingdoms.

  His autobiography, under the title of Poetry and Truth out of my
Life, is the expression of the idea- now familiar to the world through
the German mind, but a novelty to England, Old and New, when that book
appeared- that a man exists for culture; not for what he can
accomplish, but for what can be accomplished in him. The reaction of
things on the man is the only noteworthy result. An intellectual man
can see himself as a third person; therefore his faults and
delusions interest him equally with his successes. Though he wishes to
prosper in affairs, he wishes more to know the history and destiny
of man; whilst the clouds of egotists drifting about him are only
interested in a low success.

  This idea reigns in the Dichtung und Wahrheit and directs the
selection of the incidents; and nowise the external importance of
events, the rank of the personages, or the bulk of incomes. Of
course the book affords slender materials for what would be reckoned
with us a Life of Goethe;- few dates, no correspondence, no details of
offices or employments, no light on his marriage; and a period of
ten years, that should be the most active in his life, after his
settlement at Weimar, is sunk in silence. Meantime certain love
affairs that came to nothing, as people say, have the strangest
importance: he crowds us with details:- certain whimsical opinions,
cosmogonies and religions of his own invention, and especially his
relations to remarkable minds and to critical epochs of thought:-
these he magnifies. His Daily and Yearly Journal, his Italian Travels,
his Campaign in France and the historical part of his Theory of
Colors, have the same interest. In the last, he rapidly notices
Kepler, Roger Bacon, Galileo, Newton, Voltaire, etc.; and the charm of
this portion of the book consists in the simplest statement of the
relation betwixt these grandees of European scientific history and
himself; the mere drawing of the lines from Goethe to Kepler, from
Goethe to Bacon, from Goethe to Newton. The drawing of the line is,
for the time and person, a solution of the formidable problem, and
gives pleasure when Iphigenia and Faust do not, without any cost of
invention comparable to that of Iphigenia and Faust.

  This lawgiver of art is not an artist. Was it that he knew too much,
that his sight was microscopic and interfered with the just
perspective, the seeing of the whole? He is fragmentary; a writer of
occasional poems and of an encyclopaedia of sentences. When he sits
down to write a drama or a tale, he collects and sorts his
observations from a hundred sides, and combines them into the body
as fitly as he can. A great deal refuses to incorporate: this he
adds loosely as letters of the parties, leaves from their journals, or
the like. A great deal still is left that will not find any place.
This the bookbinder alone can give any cohesion to; and hence,
notwithstanding the looseness of many of his works, we have volumes of
detached paragraphs, aphorisms, Xenien,*(33) etc.

  I suppose the worldly tone of his tales grew out of the calculations
of self-culture. It was the infirmity of an admirable scholar, who
loved the world out of gratitude; who knew where libraries, galleries,
architecture, laboratories, savans and leisure were to be had, and who
did not quite trust the compensations of poverty and nakedness.
Socrates loved Athens; Montaigne, Paris; and Madame de Stael said
she was only vulnerable on that side (namely, of Paris). It has its
favorable aspect. All the geniuses are usually so ill-assorted and
sickly that one is ever wishing them somewhere else. We seldom see
anybody who is not uneasy or afraid to live. There is a slight blush
of shame on the cheek of good men and aspiring men, and a spice of
caricature. But this man was entirely at home and happy in his century
and the world. None was so fit to live, or more heartily enjoyed the
game. In this aim of culture, which is the genius of his works, is
their power. The idea of absolute, eternal truth, without reference to
my own enlargement by it, is higher. The surrender to the torrent of
poetic inspiration is higher; but compared with any motives on which
books are written in England and America, this is very truth, and
has the power to inspire which belongs to truth. Thus has he brought
back to a book some of its ancient might and dignity.

  Goethe, coming into an over-civilized time and country, when
original talent was oppressed under the load of books and mechanical
auxiliaries and the distracting variety of claims, taught men how to
dispose of this mountainous miscellany and make it subservient. I join
Napoleon with him, as being both representatives of the impatience and
reaction of nature against the morgue of conventions,- two stern
realists, who, with their scholars, have severally set the axe at
the root of the tree of cant and seeming, for this time and for all
time. This cheerful laborer, with no external popularity or
provocation, drawing his motive and his plan from his own breast,
tasked himself with stints for a giant, and without relaxation or
rest, except by alternating his pursuits, worked on for eighty years
with the steadiness of his first zeal.

  It is the last lesson of modern science that the highest
simplicity of structure is produced, not by few elements, but by the
highest complexity. Man is the most composite of all creatures; the
wheel-insect, volvox globator, is at the other extreme. We shall learn
to draw rents and revenues from the immense patrimony of the old and
the recent ages. Goethe teaches courage, and the equivalence of all
times; that the disadvantages of any epoch exist only to the
faint-hearted. Genius hovers with his sunshine and music close by
the darkest and deafest eras. No mortgage, no attainder, will hold
on men or hours. The world is young: the former great men call to us
affectionately. We too must write Bibles, to unite again the heavens
and the earthly world. The secret of genius is to suffer no fiction to
exist for us; to realize all that we know; in the high refinement of
modern life, in arts, in sciences, in books, in men, to exact good
faith, reality and a purpose; and first, last, midst and without
end, to honor every truth by use.

                    NOTES TO THE TEXT

  [Notes from the Centenary Edition of Emerson's Complete Works,
edited by his son, Edward Waldo Emerson.]

  * Jacob Behmen, or Boehme, a Silesian of humble birth in the
sixteenth century, a mystic whose writings later attracted much
attention. Mr. Emerson was early interested in his works and often
mentions them.

  *(2) William Gilbert (1540-1603), the greatest man of science of
Queen Elizabeth's reign, especially noted for his discovery that the
earth is a great magnet.

  *(3) That is, the ideal, instead of the outward shows of things.

  *(4) federal errors: a Latinism for mistakes sanctioned by custom.

  *(5) flagrant: a Latinism suggesting that, in the general dimness,
the outlines of the human world may be found in its blazing beacon
lights.

  *(6) The constant security of Mr Emerson's belief in Evolution in
its highest sense appears hear as elsewhere in his prose and verse,
and also his belief in the genius of mankind, which is another word
for Universal Mind.

  *(7) The less usual use of "secular," in its strict classical sense,
to mean "that live through the ages."

  *(8) Omar the Caliph was Mahomet's cousin and second successor.

  *(9) From the Timaeus.

  *(10) From the Theaetetus.

  *(11) From the Gorgias.

  *(12) Compare the Republic, Book VII.

  *(13) From the Phaedrus.

  *(14) See the Republic, Book VI.

  *(15) What Mr. Emerson says here of Plato, and also earlier, "He
cannot forgive in himself a partiality, but is resolved that the two
poles of thought shall appear in his statement," cannot but recall his
own method of presenting in turn different facets of the gem of truth.
Churchman and Agnostic can easily find good weapons for argument in
his works. Dr. Holmes says of this passage, "Some will smile at
hearing him say this of another." It illustrates the felicity of the
Doctor's remark that Emerson holds up the mirror to his characters
at just such an angle that we see his own face as well as that of
his hero.

  *(16) ...his soliform eye and his boniform soul: Dr. Holmes says,
"These two quaint adjectives are from the mint of Cudworth."

  *(17) From Plato's Meno, where, as also in the Phaedrus, the
doctrines of Reminiscence is brought forward, and here is reconciled
with that of the Universal Mind.

  *(18) John Selden (1584-1654), jurist, antiquarian, orientalist,
author. His Table-Talk was published in 1681.

  *(19) Marcello Malpighi of Bologna (1628-1694) is considered a
founder of microscopic anatomy.

  *(20) Leucippus: in the 5th century B.C. Leucippus held an atomic
theory later expounded by Lucretius in his poem De Rerum Natura.

  *(21) Swammerdam... Boerhaave: Swammerdam, a brilliant Dutch
naturalist of the 17th century, was especially noted for his minute
studies of the viscera and system of injection of vessels. Leuwenhoek,
his countryman and contemporary, made notable discoveries with
regard to capillary circulation and the blood corpuscles of man and
animals... Winslow was a Dane, but worked in Paris, and wrote on
purely descriptive anatomy. Eustachius of Salerno was a brilliant
investigator of human structure, especially of the ear and viscera,
though less reputed that the great Flemish anatomist Andreas Vesalius,
who was persecuted for daring to teach the real facts of human anatomy
in face of the mistaken authority of Galen. Heister was also an
anatomist. Herman Boerhaave (1688-1738), born in Holland and
educated at the University of Leyden... He studied philosophy and
medicine and became a distinguished practitioner and writer mainly
on medical subjects.

  *(22) Leibnitz: the maxim of the broad and high-minded Leibnitz
(1646-1715), "Everything is for the best in the best of possible
worlds," would have recommended him.

  *(23) The "flowing of nature" is the old doctrine of Heracleitus.
The answer of Amasis, King of Egypt, is related in "The Banquet" in
Plutarch's Morals.

  *(24) In the Timaeus it is told that Solon heard from Egyptian
priests this account of the great Athenians of the first State,
which was destroyed by an earthquake thousands of years earlier.

  *(25) Casella: Dante's friend, the beautiful singer, whom meeting,
in Purgatory, he besought to sing. Casella began "Amor che nella mente
mi ragiona," and all the souls flocked to hear.

  *(26) One of the examples of Laconic speech given by Plutarch in the
Life of Lycurgus.

  *(27) I knew a philosopher... "Mankind is a damned rascal": this was
the remark of Emerson's neighbor, a laborer.

  *(28) The Proteus: Mr. Emerson recognized Nature's secret of
Identity through all fugitive forms in the fable of the sea-god
Proteus, who, when caught sleeping by a mortal, took shapes of beasts,
of serpents, of fire, to disconcert his captor, yet, if held fast in
spite of all, must answer his questions.

  *(29) San Carlo: the valued friend here alluded to, Mr. Charles K.
Newcomb, was of a sensitive and beautiful character, a mystic, but
with the Hamlet temperament to such an extent that he was paralyzed
for all action by the tenderness of his conscience and the power
with which all sides of a question presented themselves to him in
turn. He was a member of the Brooks Farm Community, a welcome but rare
visitor at Mr. Emerson's house, and when he came he brought his
writings, which interested his host greatly. I think they never came
to publication, except a few papers in the Dial. His sense of duty
sent him to the war for the Union in the ranks. He remained a bachelor
all his life and in his last years lived much abroad.

  *(30) The dates of Lydgate and Caxton show a mistake as to Emerson's
use of them. Caxton, following Chaucer, when he introduced the
printing press to England, printed his poems and those of Lydgate, who
was younger than Chaucer.

  *(31) While writing this, Mr. Emerson was surrounded by persons
paralyzed for active life in the common world by the doubts of
conscience or entangled in over-fine-spun webs of their intellect.

  *(32) This line is probably a translation from some Arabic or
Persian source, from the connection in which it appears in Emerson's
notebook.

  *(33) Xenien: from the Greek, was used by Goethe and Schiller to
denote epigrams.

                        THE END
.
 
        MAN THE REFORMER
 
        _A Lecture read before the Mechanics' Apprentices' Library
Association, Boston, January 25, 1841_

        Mr. President, and Gentlemen,
        I wish to offer to your consideration some thoughts on the
particular and general relations of man as a reformer.  I shall
assume that the aim of each young man in this association is the very
highest that belongs to a rational mind.  Let it be granted, that our
life, as we lead it, is common and mean; that some of those offices
and functions for which we were mainly created are grown so rare in
society, that the memory of them is only kept alive in old books and
in dim traditions; that prophets and poets, that beautiful and
perfect men, we are not now, no, nor have even seen such; that some
sources of human instruction are almost unnamed and unknown among us;
that the community in which we live will hardly bear to be told that
every man should be open to ecstasy or a divine illumination, and his
daily walk elevated by intercourse with the spiritual world.  Grant
all this, as we must, yet I suppose none of my auditors will deny
that we ought to seek to establish ourselves in such disciplines and
courses as will deserve that guidance and clearer communication with
the spiritual nature.  And further, I will not dissemble my hope,
that each person whom I address has felt his own call to cast aside
all evil customs, timidities, and limitations, and to be in his place
a free and helpful man, a reformer, a benefactor, not content to slip
along through the world like a footman or a spy, escaping by his
nimbleness and apologies as many knocks as he can, but a brave and
upright man, who must find or cut a straight road to everything
excellent in the earth, and not only go honorably himself, but make
it easier for all who follow him, to go in honor and with benefit.

        In the history of the world the doctrine of Reform had never
such scope as at the present hour.  Lutherans, Hernhutters, Jesuits,
Monks, Quakers, Knox, Wesley, Swedenborg, Bentham, in their
accusations of society, all respected something, -- church or state,
literature or history, domestic usages, the market town, the dinner
table, coined money.  But now all these and all things else hear the
trumpet, and must rush to judgment, -- Christianity, the laws,
commerce, schools, the farm, the laboratory; and not a kingdom, town,
statute, rite, calling, man, or woman, but is threatened by the new
spirit.

        What if some of the objections whereby our institutions are
assailed are extreme and speculative, and the reformers tend to
idealism; that only shows the extravagance of the abuses which have
driven the mind into the opposite extreme.  It is when your facts and
persons grow unreal and fantastic by too much falsehood, that the
scholar flies for refuge to the world of ideas, and aims to recruit
and replenish nature from that source.  Let ideas establish their
legitimate sway again in society, let life be fair and poetic, and
the scholars will gladly be lovers, citizens, and philanthropists.

        It will afford no security from the new ideas, that the old
nations, the laws of centuries, the property and institutions of a
hundred cities, are built on other foundations.  The demon of reform
has a secret door into the heart of every lawmaker, of every
inhabitant of every city.  The fact, that a new thought and hope have
dawned in your breast, should apprize you that in the same hour a new
light broke in upon a thousand private hearts.  That secret which you
would fain keep, -- as soon as you go abroad, lo! there is one
standing on the doorstep, to tell you the same.  There is not the
most bronzed and sharpened money-catcher, who does not, to your
consternation, almost, quail and shake the moment he hears a question
prompted by the new ideas.  We thought he had some semblance of
ground to stand upon, that such as he at least would die hard; but he
trembles and flees.  Then the scholar says, `Cities and coaches shall
never impose on me again; for, behold every solitary dream of mine is
rushing to fulfilment.  That fancy I had, and hesitated to utter
because you would laugh, -- the broker, the attorney, the market-man
are saying the same thing.  Had I waited a day longer to speak, I had
been too late.  Behold, State Street thinks, and Wall Street doubts,
and begins to prophesy!'

        It cannot be wondered at, that this general inquest into abuses
should arise in the bosom of society, when one considers the
practical impediments that stand in the way of virtuous young men.
The young man, on entering life, finds the way to lucrative
employments blocked with abuses.  The ways of trade are grown selfish
to the borders of theft, and supple to the borders (if not beyond the
borders) of fraud.  The employments of commerce are not intrinsically
unfit for a man, or less genial to his faculties, but these are now
in their general course so vitiated by derelictions and abuses at
which all connive, that it requires more vigor and resources than can
be expected of every young man, to right himself in them; he is lost
in them; he cannot move hand or foot in them.  Has he genius and
virtue? the less does he find them fit for him to grow in, and if he
would thrive in them, he must sacrifice all the brilliant dreams of
boyhood and youth as dreams; he must forget the prayers of his
childhood; and must take on him the harness of routine and
obsequiousness.  If not so minded, nothing is left him but to begin
the world anew, as he does who puts the spade into the ground for
food.  We are all implicated, of course, in this charge; it is only
necessary to ask a few questions as to the progress of the articles
of commerce from the fields where they grew, to our houses, to become
aware that we eat and drink and wear perjury and fraud in a hundred
commodities.  How many articles of daily consumption are furnished us
from the West Indies; yet it is said, that, in the Spanish islands,
the venality of the officers of the government has passed into usage,
and that no article passes into our ships which has not been
fraudulently cheapened.  In the Spanish islands, every agent or
factor of the Americans, unless he be a consul, has taken oath that
he is a Catholic, or has caused a priest to make that declaration for
him.  The abolitionist has shown us our dreadful debt to the southern
negro.  In the island of Cuba, in addition to the ordinary
abominations of slavery, it appears, only men are bought for the
plantations, and one dies in ten every year, of these miserable
bachelors, to yield us sugar.  I leave for those who have the
knowledge the part of sifting the oaths of our custom-houses; I will
not inquire into the oppression of the sailors; I will not pry into
the usages of our retail trade.  I content myself with the fact, that
the general system of our trade, (apart from the blacker traits,
which, I hope, are exceptions denounced and unshared by all reputable
men,) is a system of selfishness; is not dictated by the high
sentiments of human nature; is not measured by the exact law of
reciprocity; much less by the sentiments of love and heroism, but is
a system of distrust, of concealment, of superior keenness, not of
giving but of taking advantage.  It is not that which a man delights
to unlock to a noble friend; which he meditates on with joy and
self-approval in his hour of love and aspiration; but rather what he
then puts out of sight, only showing the brilliant result, and
atoning for the manner of acquiring, by the manner of expending it.
I do not charge the merchant or the manufacturer.  The sins of our
trade belong to no class, to no individual.  One plucks, one
distributes, one eats.  Every body partakes, every body confesses, --
with cap and knee volunteers his confession, yet none feels himself
accountable.  He did not create the abuse; he cannot alter it.  What
is he? an obscure private person who must get his bread.  That is the
vice, -- that no one feels himself called to act for man, but only as
a fraction of man.  It happens therefore that all such ingenuous
souls as feel within themselves the irrepressible strivings of a
noble aim, who by the law of their nature must act simply, find these
ways of trade unfit for them, and they come forth from it.  Such
cases are becoming more numerous every year.

        But by coming out of trade you have not cleared yourself.  The
trail of the serpent reaches into all the lucrative professions and
practices of man.  Each has its own wrongs.  Each finds a tender and
very intelligent conscience a disqualification for success.  Each
requires of the practitioner a certain shutting of the eyes, a
certain dapperness and compliance, an acceptance of customs, a
sequestration from the sentiments of generosity and love, a
compromise of private opinion and lofty integrity.  Nay, the evil
custom reaches into the whole institution of property, until our laws
which establish and protect it, seem not to be the issue of love and
reason, but of selfishness.  Suppose a man is so unhappy as to be
born a saint, with keen perceptions, but with the conscience and love
of an angel, and he is to get his living in the world; he finds
himself excluded from all lucrative works; he has no farm, and he
cannot get one; for, to earn money enough to buy one, requires a sort
of concentration toward money, which is the selling himself for a
number of years, and to him the present hour is as sacred and
inviolable as any future hour.  Of course, whilst another man has no
land, my title to mine, your title to yours, is at once vitiated.
Inextricable seem to be the twinings and tendrils of this evil, and
we all involve ourselves in it the deeper by forming connections, by
wives and children, by benefits and debts.

        Considerations of this kind have turned the attention of many
philanthropic and intelligent persons to the claims of manual labor,
as a part of the education of every young man.  If the accumulated
wealth of the past generations is thus tainted, -- no matter how much
of it is offered to us, -- we must begin to consider if it were not
the nobler part to renounce it, and to put ourselves into primary
relations with the soil and nature, and abstaining from whatever is
dishonest and unclean, to take each of us bravely his part, with his
own hands, in the manual labor of the world.

        But it is said, `What! will you give up the immense advantages
reaped from the division of labor, and set every man to make his own
shoes, bureau, knife, wagon, sails, and needle?  This would be to put
men back into barbarism by their own act.' I see no instant prospect
of a virtuous revolution; yet I confess, I should not be pained at a
change which threatened a loss of some of the luxuries or
conveniences of society, if it proceeded from a preference of the
agricultural life out of the belief, that our primary duties as men
could be better discharged in that calling.  Who could regret to see
a high conscience and a purer taste exercising a sensible effect on
young men in their choice of occupation, and thinning the ranks of
competition in the labors of commerce, of law, and of state?  It is
easy to see that the inconvenience would last but a short time.  This
would be great action, which always opens the eyes of men.  When many
persons shall have done this, when the majority shall admit the
necessity of reform in all these institutions, their abuses will be
redressed, and the way will be open again to the advantages which
arise from the division of labor, and a man may select the fittest
employment for his peculiar talent again, without compromise.

        But quite apart from the emphasis which the times give to the
doctrine, that the manual labor of society ought to be shared among
all the members, there are reasons proper to every individual, why he
should not be deprived of it.  The use of manual labor is one which
never grows obsolete, and which is inapplicable to no person.  A man
should have a farm or a mechanical craft for his culture.  We must
have a basis for our higher accomplishments, our delicate
entertainments of poetry and philosophy, in the work of our hands.
We must have an antagonism in the tough world for all the variety of
our spiritual faculties, or they will not be born.  Manual labor is
the study of the external world.  The advantage of riches remains
with him who procured them, not with the heir.  When I go into my
garden with a spade, and dig a bed, I feel such an exhilaration and
health, that I discover that I have been defrauding myself all this
time in letting others do for me what I should have done with my own
hands.  But not only health, but education is in the work.  Is it
possible that I who get indefinite quantities of sugar, hominy,
cotton, buckets, crockery ware, and letter paper, by simply signing
my name once in three months to a cheque in favor of John Smith and
Co. traders, get the fair share of exercise to my faculties by that
act, which nature intended for me in making all these far-fetched
matters important to my comfort?  It is Smith himself, and his
carriers, and dealers, and manufacturers, it is the sailor, the
hidedrogher, the butcher, the negro, the hunter, and the planter, who
have intercepted the sugar of the sugar, and the cotton of the
cotton.  They have got the education, I only the commodity.  This
were all very well if I were necessarily absent, being detained by
work of my own, like theirs, work of the same faculties; then should
I be sure of my hands and feet, but now I feel some shame before my
wood-chopper, my ploughman, and my cook, for they have some sort of
self-sufficiency, they can contrive without my aid to bring the day
and year round, but I depend on them, and have not earned by use a
right to my arms and feet.

        Consider further the difference between the first and second
owner of property.  Every species of property is preyed on by its own
enemies, as iron by rust; timber by rot; cloth by moths; provisions
by mould, putridity, or vermin; money by thieves; an orchard by
insects; a planted field by weeds and the inroad of cattle; a stock
of cattle by hunger; a road by rain and frost; a bridge by freshets.
And whoever takes any of these things into his possession, takes the
charge of defending them from this troop of enemies, or of keeping
them in repair.  A man who supplies his own want, who builds a raft
or a boat to go a fishing, finds it easy to caulk it, or put in a
thole-pin, or mend the rudder.  What he gets only as fast as he wants
for his own ends, does not embarrass him, or take away his sleep with
looking after.  But when he comes to give all the goods he has year
after year collected, in one estate to his son, house, orchard,
ploughed land, cattle, bridges, hardware, wooden-ware, carpets,
cloths, provisions, books, money, and cannot give him the skill and
experience which made or collected these, and the method and place
they have in his own life, the son finds his hands full, -- not to
use these things, -- but to look after them and defend them from
their natural enemies.  To him they are not means, but masters.
Their enemies will not remit; rust, mould, vermin, rain, sun,
freshet, fire, all seize their own, fill him with vexation, and he is
converted from the owner into a watchman or a watch-dog to this
magazine of old and new chattels.  What a change!  Instead of the
masterly good humor, and sense of power, and fertility of resource in
himself; instead of those strong and learned hands, those piercing
and learned eyes, that supple body, and that mighty and prevailing
heart, which the father had, whom nature loved and feared, whom snow
and rain, water and land, beast and fish seemed all to know and to
serve, we have now a puny, protected person, guarded by walls and
curtains, stoves and down beds, coaches, and men-servants and
women-servants from the earth and the sky, and who, bred to depend on
all these, is made anxious by all that endangers those possessions,
and is forced to spend so much time in guarding them, that he has
quite lost sight of their original use, namely, to help him to his
ends, -- to the prosecution of his love; to the helping of his
friend, to the worship of his God, to the enlargement of his
knowledge, to the serving of his country, to the indulgence of his
sentiment, and he is now what is called a rich man, -- the menial and
runner of his riches.

        Hence it happens that the whole interest of history lies in the
fortunes of the poor.  Knowledge, Virtue, Power are the victories of
man over his necessities, his march to the dominion of the world.
Every man ought to have this opportunity to conquer the world for
himself.  Only such persons interest us, Spartans, Romans, Saracens,
English, Americans, who have stood in the jaws of need, and have by
their own wit and might extricated themselves, and made man
victorious.

        I do not wish to overstate this doctrine of labor, or insist
that every man should be a farmer, any more than that every man
should be a lexicographer.  In general, one may say, that the
husbandman's is the oldest, and most universal profession, and that
where a man does not yet discover in himself any fitness for one work
more than another, this may be preferred.  But the doctrine of the
Farm is merely this, that every man ought to stand in primary
relations with the work of the world, ought to do it himself, and not
to suffer the accident of his having a purse in his pocket, or his
having been bred to some dishonorable and injurious craft, to sever
him from those duties; and for this reason, that labor is God's
education; that he only is a sincere learner, he only can become a
master, who learns the secrets of labor, and who by real cunning
extorts from nature its sceptre.

        Neither would I shut my ears to the plea of the learned
professions, of the poet, the priest, the lawgiver, and men of study
generally; namely, that in the experience of all men of that class,
the amount of manual labor which is necessary to the maintenance of a
family, indisposes and disqualifies for intellectual exertion.  I
know, it often, perhaps usually, happens, that where there is a fine
organization apt for poetry and philosophy, that individual finds
himself compelled to wait on his thoughts, to waste several days that
he may enhance and glorify one; and is better taught by a moderate
and dainty exercise, such as rambling in the fields, rowing, skating,
hunting, than by the downright drudgery of the farmer and the smith.
I would not quite forget the venerable counsel of the Egyptian
mysteries, which declared that "there were two pairs of eyes in man,
and it is requisite that the pair which are beneath should be closed,
when the pair that are above them perceive, and that when the pair
above are closed, those which are beneath should be opened." Yet I
will suggest that no separation from labor can be without some loss
of power and of truth to the seer himself; that, I doubt not, the
faults and vices of our literature and philosophy, their too great
fineness, effeminacy, and melancholy, are attributable to the
enervated and sickly habits of the literary class.  Better that the
book should not be quite so good, and the bookmaker abler and better,
and not himself often a ludicrous contrast to all that he has
written.

        But granting that for ends so sacred and dear, some relaxation
must be had, I think, that if a man find in himself any strong bias
to poetry, to art, to the contemplative life, drawing him to these
things with a devotion incompatible with good husbandry, that man
ought to reckon early with himself, and, respecting the compensations
of the Universe, ought to ransom himself from the duties of economy,
by a certain rigor and privation in his habits.  For privileges so
rare and grand, let him not stint to pay a great tax.  Let him be a
caenobite, a pauper, and if need be, celibate also.  Let him learn to
eat his meals standing, and to relish the taste of fair water and
black bread.  He may leave to others the costly conveniences of
housekeeping, and large hospitality, and the possession of works of
art.  Let him feel that genius is a hospitality, and that he who can
create works of art needs not collect them.  He must live in a
chamber, and postpone his self-indulgence, forewarned and forearmed
against that frequent misfortune of men of genius, -- the taste for
luxury.  This is the tragedy of genius, -- attempting to drive along
the ecliptic with one horse of the heavens and one horse of the
earth, there is only discord and ruin and downfall to chariot and
charioteer.

        The duty that every man should assume his own vows, should call
the institutions of society to account, and examine their fitness to
him, gains in emphasis, if we look at our modes of living.  Is our
housekeeping sacred and honorable?  Does it raise and inspire us, or
does it cripple us instead?  I ought to be armed by every part and
function of my household, by all my social function, by my economy,
by my feasting, by my voting, by my traffic.  Yet I am almost no
party to any of these things.  Custom does it for me, gives me no
power therefrom, and runs me in debt to boot.  We spend our incomes
for paint and paper, for a hundred trifles, I know not what, and not
for the things of a man.  Our expense is almost all for conformity.
It is for cake that we run in debt; 't is not the intellect, not the
heart, not beauty, not worship, that costs so much.  Why needs any
man be rich?  Why must he have horses, fine garments, handsome
apartments, access to public houses, and places of amusement?  Only
for want of thought.  Give his mind a new image, and he flees into a
solitary garden or garret to enjoy it, and is richer with that dream,
than the fee of a county could make him.  But we are first
thoughtless, and then find that we are moneyless.  We are first
sensual, and then must be rich.  We dare not trust our wit for making
our house pleasant to our friend, and so we buy ice-creams.  He is
accustomed to carpets, and we have not sufficient character to put
floor-cloths out of his mind whilst he stays in the house, and so we
pile the floor with carpets.  Let the house rather be a temple of the
Furies of Lacedaemon, formidable and holy to all, which none but a
Spartan may enter or so much as behold.  As soon as there is faith,
as soon as there is society, comfits and cushions will be left to
slaves.  Expense will be inventive and heroic.  We shall eat hard and
lie hard, we shall dwell like the ancient Romans in narrow tenements,
whilst our public edifices, like theirs, will be worthy for their
proportion of the landscape in which we set them, for conversation,
for art, for music, for worship.  We shall be rich to great purposes;
poor only for selfish ones.

        Now what help for these evils?  How can the man who has learned
but one art, procure all the conveniences of life honestly?  Shall we
say all we think?  -- Perhaps with his own hands.  Suppose he
collects or makes them ill; -- yet he has learned their lesson.  If
he cannot do that.  -- Then perhaps he can go without.  Immense
wisdom and riches are in that.  It is better to go without, than to
have them at too great a cost.  Let us learn the meaning of economy.
Economy is a high, humane office, a sacrament, when its aim is grand;
when it is the prudence of simple tastes, when it is practised for
freedom, or love, or devotion.  Much of the economy which we see in
houses, is of a base origin, and is best kept out of sight.  Parched
corn eaten to-day that I may have roast fowl to my dinner on Sunday,
is a baseness; but parched corn and a house with one apartment, that
I may be free of all perturbations, that I may be serene and docile
to what the mind shall speak, and girt and road-ready for the lowest
mission of knowledge or goodwill, is frugality for gods and heroes.

        Can we not learn the lesson of self-help?  Society is full of
infirm people, who incessantly summon others to serve them.  They
contrive everywhere to exhaust for their single comfort the entire
means and appliances of that luxury to which our invention has yet
attained.  Sofas, ottomans, stoves, wine, game-fowl, spices,
perfumes, rides, the theatre, entertainments, -- all these they want,
they need, and whatever can be suggested more than these, they crave
also, as if it was the bread which should keep them from starving;
and if they miss any one, they represent themselves as the most
wronged and most wretched persons on earth.  One must have been born
and bred with them to know how to prepare a meal for their learned
stomach.  Meantime, they never bestir themselves to serve another
person; not they! they have a great deal more to do for themselves
than they can possibly perform, nor do they once perceive the cruel
joke of their lives, but the more odious they grow, the sharper is
the tone of their complaining and craving.  Can anything be so
elegant as to have few wants and to serve them one's self, so as to
have somewhat left to give, instead of being always prompt to grab?
It is more elegant to answer one's own needs, than to be richly
served; inelegant perhaps it may look to-day, and to a few, but it is
an elegance forever and to all.

        I do not wish to be absurd and pedantic in reform.  I do not
wish to push my criticism on the state of things around me to that
extravagant mark, that shall compel me to suicide, or to an absolute
isolation from the advantages of civil society.  If we suddenly plant
our foot, and say, -- I will neither eat nor drink nor wear nor touch
any food or fabric which I do not know to be innocent, or deal with
any person whose whole manner of life is not clear and rational, we
shall stand still.  Whose is so?  Not mine; not thine; not his.  But
I think we must clear ourselves each one by the interrogation,
whether we have earned our bread to-day by the hearty contribution of
our energies to the common benefit? and we must not cease to _tend_
to the correction of these flagrant wrongs, by laying one stone
aright every day.

        But the idea which now begins to agitate society has a wider
scope than our daily employments, our households, and the
institutions of property.  We are to revise the whole of our social
structure, the state, the school, religion, marriage, trade, science,
and explore their foundations in our own nature; we are to see that
the world not only fitted the former men, but fits us, and to clear
ourselves of every usage which has not its roots in our own mind.
What is a man born for but to be a Reformer, a Remaker of what man
has made; a renouncer of lies; a restorer of truth and good,
imitating that great Nature which embosoms us all, and which sleeps
no moment on an old past, but every hour repairs herself, yielding us
every morning a new day, and with every pulsation a new life?  Let
him renounce everything which is not true to him, and put all his
practices back on their first thoughts, and do nothing for which he
has not the whole world for his reason.  If there are inconveniences,
and what is called ruin in the way, because we have so enervated and
maimed ourselves, yet it would be like dying of perfumes to sink in
the effort to reattach the deeds of every day to the holy and
mysterious recesses of life.

        The power, which is at once spring and regulator in all efforts
of reform, is the conviction that there is an infinite worthiness in
man which will appear at the call of worth, and that all particular
reforms are the removing of some impediment.  Is it not the highest
duty that man should be honored in us?  I ought not to allow any man,
because he has broad lands, to feel that he is rich in my presence.
I ought to make him feel that I can do without his riches, that I
cannot be bought, -- neither by comfort, neither by pride, -- and
though I be utterly penniless, and receiving bread from him, that he
is the poor man beside me.  And if, at the same time, a woman or a
child discovers a sentiment of piety, or a juster way of thinking
than mine, I ought to confess it by my respect and obedience, though
it go to alter my whole way of life.

        The Americans have many virtues, but they have not Faith and
Hope.  I know no two words whose meaning is more lost sight of.  We
use these words as if they were as obsolete as Selah and Amen.  And
yet they have the broadest meaning, and the most cogent application
to Boston in 1841.  The Americans have no faith.  They rely on the
power of a dollar; they are deaf to a sentiment.  They think you may
talk the north wind down as easily as raise society; and no class
more faithless than the scholars or intellectual men.  Now if I talk
with a sincere wise man, and my friend, with a poet, with a
conscientious youth who is still under the dominion of his own wild
thoughts, and not yet harnessed in the team of society to drag with
us all in the ruts of custom, I see at once how paltry is all this
generation of unbelievers, and what a house of cards their
institutions are, and I see what one brave man, what one great
thought executed might effect.  I see that the reason of the distrust
of the practical man in all theory, is his inability to perceive the
means whereby we work.  Look, he says, at the tools with which this
world of yours is to be built.  As we cannot make a planet, with
atmosphere, rivers, and forests, by means of the best carpenters' or
engineers' tools, with chemist's laboratory and smith's forge to
boot, -- so neither can we ever construct that heavenly society you
prate of, out of foolish, sick, selfish men and women, such as we
know them to be.  But the believer not only beholds his heaven to be
possible, but already to begin to exist, -- not by the men or
materials the statesman uses, but by men transfigured and raised
above themselves by the power of principles.  To principles something
else is possible that transcends all the power of expedients.

        Every great and commanding moment in the annals of the world is
the triumph of some enthusiasm.  The victories of the Arabs after
Mahomet, who, in a few years, from a small and mean beginning,
established a larger empire than that of Rome, is an example.  They
did they knew not what.  The naked Derar, horsed on an idea, was
found an overmatch for a troop of Roman cavalry.  The women fought
like men, and conquered the Roman men.  They were miserably equipped,
miserably fed.  They were Temperance troops.  There was neither
brandy nor flesh needed to feed them.  They conquered Asia, and
Africa, and Spain, on barley.  The Caliph Omar's walking stick struck
more terror into those who saw it, than another man's sword.  His
diet was barley bread; his sauce was salt; and oftentimes by way of
abstinence he ate his bread without salt.  His drink was water.  His
palace was built of mud; and when he left Medina to go to the
conquest of Jerusalem, he rode on a red camel, with a wooden platter
hanging at his saddle, with a bottle of water and two sacks, one
holding barley, and the other dried fruits.

        But there will dawn ere long on our politics, on our modes of
living, a nobler morning than that Arabian faith, in the sentiment of
love.  This is the one remedy for all ills, the panacea of nature.
We must be lovers, and at once the impossible becomes possible.  Our
age and history, for these thousand years, has not been the history
of kindness, but of selfishness.  Our distrust is very expensive.
The money we spend for courts and prisons is very ill laid out.  We
make, by distrust, the thief, and burglar, and incendiary, and by our
court and jail we keep him so.  An acceptance of the sentiment of
love throughout Christendom for a season, would bring the felon and
the outcast to our side in tears, with the devotion of his faculties
to our service.  See this wide society of laboring men and women.  We
allow ourselves to be served by them, we live apart from them, and
meet them without a salute in the streets.  We do not greet their
talents, nor rejoice in their good fortune, nor foster their hopes,
nor in the assembly of the people vote for what is dear to them.
Thus we enact the part of the selfish noble and king from the
foundation of the world.  See, this tree always bears one fruit.  In
every household, the peace of a pair is poisoned by the malice,
slyness, indolence, and alienation of domestics.  Let any two matrons
meet, and observe how soon their conversation turns on the troubles
from their "_help_," as our phrase is.  In every knot of laborers,
the rich man does not feel himself among his friends, -- and at the
polls he finds them arrayed in a mass in distinct opposition to him.
We complain that the politics of masses of the people are controlled
by designing men, and led in opposition to manifest justice and the
common weal, and to their own interest.  But the people do not wish
to be represented or ruled by the ignorant and base.  They only vote
for these, because they were asked with the voice and semblance of
kindness.  They will not vote for them long.  They inevitably prefer
wit and probity.  To use an Egyptian metaphor, it is not their will
for any long time "to raise the nails of wild beasts, and to depress
the heads of the sacred birds." Let our affection flow out to our
fellows; it would operate in a day the greatest of all revolutions.
It is better to work on institutions by the sun than by the wind.
The state must consider the poor man, and all voices must speak for
him.  Every child that is born must have a just chance for his bread.
Let the amelioration in our laws of property proceed from the
concession of the rich, not from the grasping of the poor.  Let us
begin by habitual imparting.  Let us understand that the equitable
rule is, that no one should take more than his share, let him be ever
so rich.  Let me feel that I am to be a lover.  I am to see to it
that the world is the better for me, and to find my reward in the
act.  Love would put a new face on this weary old world in which we
dwell as pagans and enemies too long, and it would warm the heart to
see how fast the vain diplomacy of statesmen, the impotence of
armies, and navies, and lines of defence, would be superseded by this
unarmed child.  Love will creep where it cannot go, will accomplish
that by imperceptible methods, -- being its own lever, fulcrum, and
power, -- which force could never achieve.  Have you not seen in the
woods, in a late autumn morning, a poor fungus or mushroom, -- a
plant without any solidity, nay, that seemed nothing but a soft mush
or jelly, -- by its constant, total, and inconceivably gentle
pushing, manage to break its way up through the frosty ground, and
actually to lift a hard crust on its head?  It is the symbol of the
power of kindness.  The virtue of this principle in human society in
application to great interests is obsolete and forgotten.  Once or
twice in history it has been tried in illustrious instances, with
signal success.  This great, overgrown, dead Christendom of ours
still keeps alive at least the name of a lover of mankind.  But one
day all men will be lovers; and every calamity will be dissolved in
the universal sunshine.

        Will you suffer me to add one trait more to this portrait of
man the reformer?  The mediator between the spiritual and the actual
world should have a great prospective prudence.  An Arabian poet
describes his hero by saying,

        "Sunshine was he
        In the winter day;
        And in the midsummer
        Coolness and shade."

        He who would help himself and others, should not be a subject
of irregular and interrupted impulses of virtue, but a continent,
persisting, immovable person, -- such as we have seen a few scattered
up and down in time for the blessing of the world; men who have in
the gravity of their nature a quality which answers to the fly-wheel
in a mill, which distributes the motion equably over all the wheels,
and hinders it from falling unequally and suddenly in destructive
shocks.  It is better that joy should be spread over all the day in
the form of strength, than that it should be concentrated into
ecstasies, full of danger and followed by reactions.  There is a
sublime prudence, which is the very highest that we know of man,
which, believing in a vast future, -- sure of more to come than is
yet seen, -- postpones always the present hour to the whole life;
postpones talent to genius, and special results to character.  As the
merchant gladly takes money from his income to add to his capital, so
is the great man very willing to lose particular powers and talents,
so that he gain in the elevation of his life.  The opening of the
spiritual senses disposes men ever to greater sacrifices, to leave
their signal talents, their best means and skill of procuring a
present success, their power and their fame, -- to cast all things
behind, in the insatiable thirst for divine communications.  A purer
fame, a greater power rewards the sacrifice.  It is the conversion of
our harvest into seed.  As the farmer casts into the ground the
finest ears of his grain, the time will come when we too shall hold
nothing back, but shall eagerly convert more than we now possess into
means and powers, when we shall be willing to sow the sun and the
moon for seeds.

.
        UNCOLLECTED PROSE
        by Ralph Waldo Emerson

        _The Lord's Supper_
        _The Editors to the Reader_
        _Thoughts on Modern Literature_
        _Two Years before the Mast._ A Personal Narrative of Life at
Sea.
        _Social Destiny of Man: or Association and Reorganization of
Industry._
        _Michael Angelo, considered as a Philosophic Poet, with
Translations._
        _Essays and Poems_. By JONES VERY.
        _Walter Savage Landor_
        _Transcendentalism_
        _The Senses and the Soul_
        _Prayers_
        _Fourierism and the Socialists_
        _Chardon Street and Bible Conventions_
        _Agriculture of Massachusetts_
        _The Zincali: or an Account of the Gypsies of Spain.
        _Ancient Spanish Ballads, Historical and Romantic.
        _Tecumseh; a Poem_. By GEORGE H. COLTON.
        _Intelligence_
        _Harvard University_.
        _English Reformers_
        _Poems_. By ALFRED TENNYSON.
        _A Letter to Rev. Wm. E. Channing, D. D._ By O. A. BROWNSON
        _Europe and European Books_
        _The Bible in Spain, or the Journeys, Adventures, and
Imprisonments of an Englishman in an attempt to circulate the
Scriptures in the Peninsula_.
        _Past and Present_      By Thomas Carlyle.
        _Antislavery Poems._    By JOHN PIERPONT. Boston: Oliver Johnson.  1843.
        _Sonnets and other Poems._      By WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON.
        _America -- an Ode; and other Poems._  By N. W. COFFIN.
        _Poems by_      WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING.
        _A Letter_
        _The Huguenots in France and America_
        _The Spanish Student. A Play in Three Acts_. By H. W.  Longfellow.
        _The Dream of a Day, and other Poems_. By JAMES G. PERCIVAL.
        _The Tragic_
------------------------------------------
 
        _The Lord's Supper_
 
        The Kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness,
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost. -- ROMANS XIV. 17.

        In the history of the Church no subject has been more fruitful
of controversy than the Lord's Supper.  There never has been any
unanimity in the understanding of its nature, nor any uniformity in
the mode of celebrating it.  Without considering the frivolous
questions which have been lately debated as to the posture in which
men should partake of it; whether mixed or unmixed wine should be
served; whether leavened or unleavened bread should be broken; the
questions have been settled differently in every church, who should
be admitted to the feast, and how often it should be prepared.  In
the Catholic Church, infants were at one time permitted and then
forbidden to partake; and, since the ninth century, the laity receive
the bread only, the cup being reserved to the priesthood.  So, as to
the time of the solemnity.  In the fourth Lateran Council, it was
decreed that any believer should communicate at least once in a year
-- at Easter.  Afterwards it was determined that this Sacrament
should be received three times in the year -- at Easter, Whitsuntide,
and Christmas.  But more important controversies have arisen
respecting its nature.  The famous question of the Real Presence was
the main controversy between the Church of England and the Church of
Rome.  The doctrine of the Consubstantiation taught by Luther was
denied by Calvin.  In the Church of England, Archbishops Laud and
Wake maintained that the elements were an Eucharist or sacrifice of
Thanksgiving to God; Cudworth and Warburton, that this was not a
sacrifice, but a sacrificial feast; and Bishop Hoadley, that it was
neither a sacrifice nor a feast after sacrifice, but a simple
commemoration.  And finally, it is now near two hundred years since
the Society of Quakers denied the authority of the rite altogether,
and gave good reasons for disusing it.

        I allude to these facts only to show that, so far from the
supper being a tradition in which men are fully agreed, there always
been the widest room for difference of opinion upon this particular.

        Having recently given particular attention to this subject, I
was led to the conclusion that Jesus did not intend to establish an
institution for perpetual observance when he ate the Passover with
his disciples; and, further, to the opinion, that it is not expedient
to celebrate it as we do.  I shall now endeavor to state distinctly
my reasons for these two opinions.

        I. The authority of the rite.

        An account of the last supper of Christ with his disciples is
given by the four Evangelists, Matthew, Mark, Luke, and John.

        In St. Matthew's Gospel (Matt. XXVI. 26-30) are recorded the
words of Jesus in giving bread and wine on that occasion to his
disciples, but no expression occurs intimating that this feast was
hereafter to be commemorated.

        In St. Mark (Mark XIV. 23) the same words are recorded, and
still with no intimation that the occasion was to be remembered.

        St. Luke (Luke XXII. 15), after relating the breaking of the
bread, has these words: This do in remembrance of me.

        In St. John, although other occurrences of the same evening are
related, this whole transaction is passed over without notice.

        Now observe the facts.  Two of the Evangelists, namely, Matthew
and John, were of the twelve disciples, and were present on that
occasion.  Neither of them drops the slightest intimation of any
intention on the part of Jesus to set up anything permanent.  John,
especially, the beloved disciple, who has recorded with minuteness
the conversation and the transactions of that memorable evening, has
quite omitted such a notice.  Neither does it appear to have come to
the knowledge of Mark who, though not an eye-witness, relates the
other facts.  This material fact, that the occasion was to be
remembered, is found in Luke alone, who was not present.  There is no
reason, however, that we know, for rejecting the account of Luke.  I
doubt not, the expression was used by Jesus.  I shall presently
consider its meaning.  I have only brought these accounts together,
that you may judge whether it is likely that a solemn institution, to
be continued to the end of time by all mankind, as they should come,
nation after nation, within the influence of the Christian religion,
would have been established in this slight manner -- in a manner so
slight, that the intention of commemorating it should not appear,
from their narrative, to have caught the ear or dwelt in the mind of
the only two among the twelve who wrote down what happened.

        Still we must suppose that the expression, _"This do in
remembrance of me,"_ had come to the ear of Luke from some disciple
who was present.  What did it really signify?  It is a prophetic and
an affectionate expression.  Jesus is a Jew, sitting with his
countrymen, celebrating their national feast.  He thinks of his own
impending death, and wishes the minds of his disciples to be prepared
for it.  "When hereafter," he says to them, "you shall keep the
Passover, it will have an altered aspect to your eyes.  It is now a
historical covenant of God with the Jewish nation.  Hereafter, it
will remind you of a new covenant sealed with my blood.  In years to
come, as long as your people shall come up to Jerusalem to keep this
feast, the connection which has subsisted between us will give a new
meaning in your eyes to the national festival, as the anniversary of
my death." I see natural feeling and beauty in the use of such
language from Jesus, a friend to his friends; I can readily imagine
that he was willing and desirous, when his disciples met, his memory
should hallow their intercourse; but I cannot bring myself to believe
that in the use of such an expression he looked beyond the living
generation, beyond the abolition of the festival he was celebrating,
and the scattering of the nation, and meant to impose a memorial
feast upon the whole world.

        Without presuming to fix precisely the purpose in the mind of
Jesus, you will see that many opinions may be entertained of his
intention, all consistent with the opinion that he did not design a
perpetual ordinance.  He may have foreseen that his disciples would
meet to remember him, and that with good effect.  It may have crossed
his mind that this would be easily continued a hundred or a thousand
years -- as men more easily transmit a form than a virtue -- and yet
have been altogether out of his purpose to fasten it upon men in all
times and all countries.

        But though the words, _Do this in remembrance of me_, do occur
in Matthew, Mark, or John, and although it should be granted us that,
taken alone, they do not necessarily import so much as is usually
thought, yet many persons are apt to imagine that the very striking
and personal manner in which this eating and drinking is described,
indicates a striking and formal purpose to found a festival.  And I
admit that this impression might probably be left upon the mind of
one who read only the passages under consideration in the New
Testament.  But this impression is removed by reading any narrative
of the mode in which the ancient or the modern Jews have kept the
Passover.  It is then perceived that the leading circumstances in the
Gospels are only a faithful account of that ceremony.  Jesus did not
celebrate the Passover, and afterwards the Supper, but the Supper
_was_ the Passover.  He did with his disciples exactly what every
master of a family in Jerusalem was doing at the same hour with his
household.  It appears that the Jews ate the lamb and the unleavened
bread, and drank wine after a prescribed manner.  It was the custom
for the master of the feast to break the bread and to bless it, using
this formula, which the Talmudists have preserved to us, "Blessed be
Thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world, who hast produced this
food from the earth," -- and to give it to every one at the table.
It was the custom of the master of the family to take the cup which
contained the wine, and to bless it, saying, "Blessed be Thou, O
Lord, who givest us the fruit of the vine," -- and then to give the
cup to all.  Among the modern Jews who in their dispersion retain the
Passover, a hymn is also sung after this ceremony, specifying the
twelve great works done by God for the deliverance of their fathers
out of Egypt.

        But still it may be asked, why did Jesus make expressions so
extraordinary and emphatic as these -- "This is my body which is
broken for you.  Take; eat.  This is my blood which is shed for you.
Drink it." -- I reply they are not extraordinary expressions from
him.  They were familiar in his mouth.  He always taught by parables
and symbols.  It was the national way of teaching and was largely
used by him.  Remember the readiness which he always showed to
spiritualize every occurrence.  He stooped and wrote on the sand.  He
admonished his disciples respecting the leaven of the Pharisees.  He
instructed the woman of Samaria respecting living water.  He
permitted himself to be anointed, declaring that it was for his
interment.  He washed the feet of his disciples.  These are admitted
to be symbolical actions and expressions.  Here, in like manner, he
calls the bread his body, and bids the disciples eat.  He had used
the same expression repeatedly before.  The reason why St. John does
not repeat his words on this occasion, seems to be that he had
reported a similar discourse of Jesus to the people of Capernaum more
at length already (John VI.  27).  He there tells the Jews, "Except
ye eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink His blood, ye have no
life in you." And when the Jews on that occasion complained that they
did not comprehend what he meant, he added for their better
understanding, and as if for our understanding, that we might not
think his body was to be actually eaten, that he only meant, _we
should live by his commandment_.  He closed his discourse with these
explanatory expressions: "The flesh profiteth nothing; the _words_
that I speak to you, they are spirit and they are life."

        Whilst I am upon this topic, I cannot help remarking that it is
not a little singular that we should have preserved this rite and
insisted upon perpetuating one symbolical act of Christ whilst we
have totally neglected all others -- particularly one other which had
at least an equal claim to our observance.  Jesus washed the feet of
his disciples and told them that, as he had washed their feet, they
ought to wash one another's feet; for he had given them an example,
that they should do as he had done to them.  I ask any person who
believes the Supper to have been designed by Jesus to be commemorated
forever, to go and read the account of it in the other Gospels, and
then compare with it the account of this transaction in St. John, and
tell me if this be not much more explicitly authorized than the
Supper.  It only differs in this, that we have found the Supper used
in New England and the washing of the feet not.  But if we had found
it an established rite in our churches, on grounds of mere authority,
it would have been impossible to have argued against it.  That rite
is used by the Church of Rome, and by the Sandemanians.  It has been
very properly dropped by other Christians.  Why?  For two reasons:
(1) because it was a local custom, and unsuitable in western
countries; and (2) because it was typical, and all understand that
humility is the thing signified.  But the Passover was local too, and
does not concern us, and its bread and wine were typical, and do not
help us to understand the redemption which they signified.

        These views of the original account of the Lord's Supper lead
me to esteem it an occasion full of solemn and prophetic interest,
but never intended by Jesus to be the foundation of a perpetual
institution.

        It appears however in Christian history that the disciples had
very early taken advantage of these impressive words of Christ to
hold religious meetings, where they broke bread and drank wine as
symbols.

        I look upon this fact as very natural in the circumstances of
the church.  The disciples lived together; they threw all their
property into a common stock; they were bound together by the memory
of Christ, and nothing could be more natural than that this eventful
evening should be affectionately remembered by them; that they, Jews
like Jesus, should adopt his expressions and his types, and
furthermore, that what was done with peculiar propriety by them, his
personal friends, with less propriety should come to be extended to
their companions also.  In this way religious feasts grew up among
the early Christians.  They were readily adopted by the Jewish
converts who were familiar with religious feasts, and also by the
Pagan converts whose idolatrous worship had been made up of sacred
festivals, and who very readily abused these to gross riot, as
appears from the censures of St. Paul.  Many persons consider this
fact, the observance of such a memorial feast by the early disciples,
decisive of the question whether it ought to be observed by us.  For
my part I see nothing to wonder at in its originating with them; all
that is surprising is that it should exist among us.  There was good
reason for his personal friends to remember their friend and repeat
his words.  It was only too probable that among the half converted
Pagans and Jews, any rite, any form, would find favor, whilst yet
unable to comprehend the spiritual character of Christianity.

        The circumstance, however, that St. Paul adopts these views,
has seemed to many persons conclusive in favor of the institution.  I
am of opinion that it is wholly upon the epistle to the Corinthians,
and not upon the Gospels, that the ordinance stands.  Upon this
matter of St. Paul's view of the Supper, a few important
considerations must be stated.

        The end which he has in view, in the eleventh chapter of the
first epistle is, not to enjoin upon his friends to observe the
Supper, but to censure their abuse of it.  _We_ quote the passage
now-a-days as if it enjoined attendance upon the Supper; but he wrote
it merely to chide them for drunkenness.  To make their enormity
plainer he goes back to the origin of this religious feast to show
what sort of feast that was, out of which this riot of theirs came,
and so relates the transactions of the Last Supper.  _"I have
received of the Lord,"_ he says, _"that which I delivered to you."_
By this expression it is often thought that a miraculous
communication is implied; but certainly without good reason, if it is
remembered that St. Paul was living in the lifetime of all the
apostles who could give him an account of the transaction; and it is
contrary to all reason to suppose that God should work a miracle to
convey information that could so easily be got by natural means.  So
that the import of the expression is that he had received the story
of an eye-witness such as we also possess.

        But there is a material circumstance which diminishes our
confidence in the correctness of the Apostle's view; and that is, the
observation that his mind had not escaped the prevalent error of the
primitive church, the belief, namely, that the second coming of
Christ would shortly occur, until which time, he tells them, this
feast was to be kept.  Elsewhere he tells them, that, at that time
the world would be burnt up with fire, and a new government
established, in which the Saints would sit on thrones; so slow were
the disciples during the life, and after the ascension of Christ, to
receive the idea which we receive, that his second coming was a
spiritual kingdom, the dominion of his religion in the hearts of men,
to be extended gradually over the whole world.

        In this manner we may see clearly enough how this ancient
ordinance got its footing among the early Christians, and this single
expectation of a speedy reappearance of a temporal Messiah, which
kept its influence even over so spiritual a man as St. Paul, would
naturally tend to preserve the use of the rite when once established.

        We arrive then at this conclusion, _first_, that it does not
appear, from a careful examination of the account of the Last Supper
in the Evangelists, that it was designed by Jesus to be perpetual;
_secondly_, that it does not appear that the opinion of St. Paul, all
things considered, ought to alter our opinion derived from the
evangelists.

        One general remark before quitting this branch of the subject.
We ought to be cautious in taking even the best ascertained opinions
and practices of the primitive church, for our own.  If it could be
satisfactorily shown that they esteemed it authorized and to be
transmitted forever, that does not settle the question for us.  We
know how inveterately they were attached to their Jewish prejudices,
and how often even the influence of Christ failed to enlarge their
views.  On every other subject succeeding times have learned to form
a judgment more in accordance with the spirit of Christianity than
was the practice of the early ages.

        But it is said: "Admit that the rite was not designed to be
perpetual.  What harm doth it?  Here it stands, generally accepted,
under some form, by the Christian world, the undoubted occasion of
much good; is it not better it should remain?"

        II. This is the question of expediency.

        I proceed to state a few objections that in my judgment lie
against its use in its present form.

        1. If the view which I have taken of the history of the
institution be correct, then the claim of authority should be dropped
in administering it.  You say, every time you celebrate the rite,
that Jesus enjoined it; and the whole language you use conveys that
impression.  But if you read the New Testament as I do, you do not
believe he did.

        2. It has seemed to me that the use of this ordinance tends to
produce confusion in our views of the relation of the soul to God.
It is the old objection to the doctrine of the Trinity, -- that the
true worship was transferred from God to Christ, or that such
confusion was introduced into the soul, that an undivided worship was
given nowhere.  Is not that the effect of the Lord's Supper?  I
appeal now to the convictions of communicants -- and ask such persons
whether they have not been occasionally conscious of a painful
confusion of thought between the worship due to God and the
commemoration due to Christ.  For, the service does not stand upon
the basis of a voluntary act, but is imposed by authority.  It is an
expression of gratitude to Christ, enjoined by Christ.  There is an
endeavor to keep Jesus in mind, whilst yet the prayers are addressed
to God.  I fear it is the effect of this ordinance to clothe Jesus
with an authority which he never claimed and which distracts the mind
of the worshipper.  I know our opinions differ much respecting the
nature and offices of Christ, and the degree of veneration to which
he is entitled.  I am so much a Unitarian as this: that I believe the
human mind cannot admit but one God, and that every effort to pay
religious homage to more than one being, goes to take away all right
ideas.  I appeal, brethren, to your individual experience.  In the
moment when you make the least petition to God, though it be but a
silent wish that he may approve you, or add one moment to your life,
-- do you not, in the very act, necessarily exclude all other beings
from your thought?  In that act, the soul stands alone with God, and
Jesus is no more present to the mind than your brother or your child.

        But is not Jesus called in Scripture the Mediator?  He is the
mediator in that only sense in which possibly any being can mediate
between God and man -- that is an Instructor of man.  He teaches us
how to become like God.  And a true disciple of Jesus will receive
the light he gives most thankfully; but the thanks he offers, and
which an exalted being will accept, are not _compliments_ --
commemorations, -- but the use of that instruction.

        3. Passing other objections, I come to this, that the _use of
the elements_, however suitable to the people and the modes of
thought in the East, where it originated, is foreign and unsuited to
affect us.  Whatever long usage and strong association may have done
in some individuals to deaden this repulsion, I apprehend that their
use is rather tolerated than loved by any of us.  We are not
accustomed to express our thoughts or emotions by symbolical actions.
Most men find the bread and wine no aid to devotion and to some, it
is a painful impediment.  To eat bread is one thing; to love the
precepts of Christ and resolve to obey them is quite another.

        The statement of this objection leads me to say that I think
this difficulty, wherever it is felt, to be entitled to the greatest
weight.  It is alone a sufficient objection to the ordinance.  It is
my own objection.  This mode of commemorating Christ is not suitable
to me.  That is reason enough why I should abandon it.  If I believed
that it was enjoined by Jesus on his disciples, and that he even
contemplated making permanent this mode of commemoration, every way
agreeable to an eastern mind, and yet, on trial, it was disagreeable
to my own feelings, I should not adopt it.  I should choose other
ways which, as more effectual upon me, he would approve more.  For I
choose that my remembrances of him should be pleasing, affecting,
religious.  I will love him as a glorified friend, after the free way
of friendship, and not pay him a stiff sign of respect, as men do to
those whom they fear.  A passage read from his discourses, a moving
provocation to works like his, any act or meeting which tends to
awaken a pure thought, a flow of love, an original design of virtue,
I call a worthy, a true commemoration.

        4. Fourthly, the importance ascribed to this particular
ordinance is not consistent with the spirit of Christianity.  The
general object and effect of this ordinance is unexceptionable.  It
has been, and is, I doubt not, the occasion of indefinite good; but
an importance is given by Christians to it which never can belong to
any form.  My friends, the apostle well assures us that "the kingdom
of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy, in
the Holy Ghost." I am not so foolish as to declaim against forms.
Forms are as essential as bodies; but to exalt particular forms, to
adhere to one form a moment after it is out-grown, is unreasonable,
and it is alien to the spirit of Christ.  If I understand the
distinction of Christianity, the reason why it is to be preferred
over all other systems and is divine is this, that it is a moral
system; that it presents men with truths which are their own reason,
and enjoins practices that are their own justification; that if
miracles may be said to have been its evidence to the first
Christians, they are not its evidence to us, but the doctrines
themselves; that every practice is Christian which praises itself,
and every practice unchristian which condemns itself.  I am not
engaged to Christianity by decent forms, or saving ordinances; it is
not usage, it is not what I do not understand, that binds me to it --
let these be the sandy foundations of falsehoods.  What I revere and
obey in it is its reality, its boundless charity, its deep interior
life, the rest it gives to my mind, the echo it returns to my
thoughts, the perfect accord it makes with my reason through all its
representation of God and His Providence; and the persuasion and
courage that come out thence to lead me upward and onward.  Freedom
is the essence of this faith.  It has for its object simply to make
men good and wise.  Its institutions, then, should be as flexible as
the wants of men.  That form out of which the life and suitableness
have departed, should be as worthless in its eyes as the dead leaves
that are falling around us.

        And therefore, although for the satisfaction of others, I have
labored to show by the history that this rite was not intended to be
perpetual; although I have gone back to weigh the expressions of
Paul, I feel that here is the true point of view.  In the midst of
considerations as to what Paul thought, and why he so thought, I
cannot help feeling that it is time misspent to argue to or from his
convictions, or those of Luke and John, respecting any form.  I seem
to lose the substance in seeking the shadow.  That for which Paul
lived and died so gloriously; that for which Jesus gave himself to be
crucified; the end that animated the thousand martyrs and heroes who
have followed his steps, was to redeem us from a formal religion, and
teach us to seek our well-being in the formation of the soul.  The
whole world was full of idols and ordinances.  The Jewish was a
religion of forms.  The Pagan was a religion of forms; it was all
body -- it had no life -- and the Almighty God was pleased to qualify
and send forth a man to teach men that they must serve him with the
heart; that only that life was religious which was thoroughly good;
that sacrifice was smoke, and forms were shadows.  This man lived and
died true to this purpose; and now, with his blessed word and life
before us, Christians must contend that it is a matter of vital
importance -- really a duty, to commemorate him by a certain form,
whether that form be agreeable to their understandings or not.

        Is not this to make vain the gift of God?  Is not this to turn
back the hand on the dial?  Is not this to make men -- to make
ourselves -- forget that not forms, but duties; not names, but
righteousness and love are enjoined; and that in the eye of God there
is no other measure of the value of any one form than the measure of
its use?

        There remain some practical objections to the ordinance into
which I shall not now enter.  There is one on which I had intended to
say a few words; I mean the unfavorable relation in which it places
that numerous class of persons who abstain from it merely from
disinclination to the rite.

        Influenced by these considerations, I have proposed to the
brethren of the Church to drop the use of the elements and the claim
of authority in the administration of this ordinance, and have
suggested a mode in which a meeting for the same purpose might be
held free of objection.

        My brethren have considered my views with patience and candor,
and have recommended unanimously an adherence to the present form.  I
have, therefore, been compelled to consider whether it becomes me to
administer it.  I am clearly of opinion I ought not.  This discourse
has already been so far extended, that I can only say that the reason
of my determination is shortly this: -- It is my desire, in the
office of a Christian minister, to do nothing which I cannot do with
my whole heart.  Having said this, I have said all.  I have no
hostility to this institution; I am only stating my want of sympathy
with it.  Neither should I ever have obtruded this opinion upon other
people, had I not been called by my office to administer it.  That is
the end of my opposition, that I am not interested in it.  I am
content that it stand to the end of the world, if it please men and
please heaven, and I shall rejoice in all the good it produces.

        As it is the prevailing opinion and feeling in our religious
community, that it is an indispensable part of the pastoral office to
administer this ordinance, I am about to resign into your hands that
office which you have confided to me.  It has many duties for which I
am feebly qualified.  It has some which it will always be my delight
to discharge, according to my ability, wherever I exist.  And whilst
the recollection of its claims oppresses me with a sense of my
unworthiness, I am consoled by the hope that no time and no change
can deprive me of the satisfaction of pursuing and exercising its
highest functions.

        September 9, 1832.

 

        ESSAYS FROM "THE DIAL"
 
        _The Editors to the Reader_

        We invite the attention of our countrymen to a new design.
Probably not quite unexpected or unannounced will our Journal appear,
though small pains have been taken to secure its welcome.  Those, who
have immediately acted in editing the present Number, cannot accuse
themselves of any unbecoming forwardness in their undertaking, but
rather of a backwardness, when they remember how often in many
private circles the work was projected, how eagerly desired, and only
postponed because no individual volunteered to combine and
concentrate the free-will offerings of many cooperators.  With some
reluctance the present conductors of this work have yielded
themselves to the wishes of their friends, finding something sacred
and not to be withstood in the importunity which urged the production
of a Journal in a new spirit.

        As they have not proposed themselves to the work, neither can
they lay any the least claim to an option or determination of the
spirit in which it is conceived, or to what is peculiar in the
design.  In that respect, they have obeyed, though with great joy,
the strong current of thought and feeling, which, for a few years
past, has led many sincere persons in New England to make new demands
on literature, and to reprobate that rigor of our conventions of
religion and education which is turning us to stone, which renounces
hope, which looks only backward, which asks only such a future as the
past, which suspects improvement, and holds nothing so much in horror
as new views and the dreams of youth.

        With these terrors the conductors of the present Journal have
nothing to do, -- not even so much as a word of reproach to waste.
They know that there is a portion of the youth and of the adult
population of this country, who have not shared them; who have in
secret or in public paid their vows to truth and freedom; who love
reality too well to care for names, and who live by a Faith too
earnest and profound to suffer them to doubt the eternity of its
object, or to shake themselves free from its authority.  Under the
fictions and customs which occupied others, these have explored the
Necessary, the Plain, the True, the Human, -- and so gained a vantage
ground, which commands the history of the past and the present.

        No one can converse much with different classes of society in
New England, without remarking the progress of a revolution.  Those
who share in it have no external organization, no badge, no creed, no
name.  They do not vote, or print, or even meet together.  They do
not know each other's faces or names.  They are united only in a
common love of truth, and love of its work.  They are of all
conditions and constitutions.  Of these acolytes, if some are happily
born and well bred, many are no doubt ill dressed, ill placed, ill
made -- with as many scars of hereditary vice as other men.  Without
pomp, without trumpet, in lonely and obscure places, in solitude, in
servitude, in compunctions and privations, trudging beside the team
in the dusty road, or drudging a hireling in other men's cornfields,
schoolmasters, who teach a few children rudiments for a pittance,
ministers of small parishes of the obscurer sects, lone women in
dependent condition, matrons and young maidens, rich and poor,
beautiful and hard-favored, without concert or proclamation of any
kind, they have silently given in their several adherence to a new
hope, and in all companies do signify a greater trust in the nature
and resources of man, than the laws or the popular opinions will well
allow.

        This spirit of the time is felt by every individual with some
difference, -- to each one casting its light upon the objects nearest
to his temper and habits of thought; -- to one, coming in the shape
of special reforms in the state; to another, in modifications of the
various callings of men, and the customs of business; to a third,
opening a new scope for literature and art; to a fourth, in
philosophical insight; to a fifth, in the vast solitudes of prayer.
It is in every form a protest against usage, and a search for
principles.  In all its movements, it is peaceable, and in the very
lowest marked with a triumphant success.  Of course, it rouses the
opposition of all which it judges and condemns, but it is too
confident in its tone to comprehend an objection, and so builds no
outworks for possible defence against contingent enemies.  It has the
step of Fate, and goes on existing like an oak or a river, because it
must.

 
        In literature, this influence appears not yet in new books so
much as in the higher tone of criticism.  The antidote to all
narrowness is the comparison of the record with nature, which at once
shames the record and stimulates to new attempts.  Whilst we look at
this, we wonder how any book has been thought worthy to be preserved.
There is somewhat in all life untranslatable into language.  He who
keeps his eye on that will write better than others, and think less
of his writing, and of all writing.  Every thought has a certain
imprisoning as well as uplifting quality, and, in proportion to its
energy on the will, refuses to become an object of intellectual
contemplation.  Thus what is great usually slips through our fingers,
and it seems wonderful how a lifelike word ever comes to be written.
If our Journal share the impulses of the time, it cannot now
prescribe its own course.  It cannot foretell in orderly propositions
what it shall attempt.  All criticism should be poetic;
unpredictable; superseding, as every new thought does, all foregone
thoughts, and making a new light on the whole world.  Its brow is not
wrinkled with circumspection, but serene, cheerful, adoring.  It has
all things to say, and no less than all the world for its final
audience.

        Our plan embraces much more than criticism; were it not so, our
criticism would be naught.  Everything noble is directed on life, and
this is.  We do not wish to say pretty or curious things, or to
reiterate a few propositions in varied forms, but, if we can, to give
expression to that spirit which lifts men to a higher platform,
restores to them the religious sentiment, brings them worthy aims and
pure pleasures, purges the inward eye, makes life less desultory,
and, through raising man to the level of nature, takes away its
melancholy from the landscape, and reconciles the practical with the
speculative powers.

        But perhaps we are telling our little story too gravely.  There
are always great arguments at hand for a true action, even for the
writing of a few pages.  There is nothing but seems near it and
prompts it, -- the sphere in the ecliptic, the sap in the apple tree,
-- every fact, every appearance seem to persuade to it.

        Our means correspond with the ends we have indicated.  As we
wish not to multiply books, but to report life, our resources are
therefore not so much the pens of practised writers, as the discourse
of the living, and the portfolios which friendship has opened to us.
From the beautiful recesses of private thought; from the experience
and hope of spirits which are withdrawing from all old forms, and
seeking in all that is new somewhat to meet their inappeasable
longings; from the secret confession of genius afraid to trust itself
to aught but sympathy; from the conversation of fervid and mystical
pietists; from tear-stained diaries of sorrow and passion; from the
manuscripts of young poets; and from the records of youthful taste
commenting on old works of art; we hope to draw thoughts and
feelings, which being alive can impart life.

        And so with diligent hands and good intent we set down our Dial
on the earth.  We wish it may resemble that instrument in its
celebrated happiness, that of measuring no hours but those of
sunshine.  Let it be one cheerful rational voice amidst the din of
mourners and polemics.  Or to abide by our chosen image, let it be
such a Dial, not as the dead face of a clock, hardly even such as the
Gnomon in a garden, but rather such a Dial as is the Garden itself,
in whose leaves and flowers and fruits the suddenly awakened sleeper
is instantly apprised not what part of dead time, but what state of
life and growth is now arrived and arriving.

 
 
        _Thoughts on Modern Literature_

        There is no better illustration of the laws by which the world
is governed than Literature.  There is no luck in it.  It proceeds by
Fate.  Every scripture is given by the inspiration of God.  Every
composition proceeds out of a greater or less depth of thought, and
this is the measure of its effect.  The highest class of books are
those which express the moral element; the next, works of
imagination; and the next, works of science; -- all dealing in
realities, -- what ought to be, what is, and what appears.  These, in
proportion to the truth and beauty they involve, remain; the rest
perish.  They proceed out of the silent living mind to be heard again
by the living mind.  Of the best books it is hardest to write the
history.  Those books which are for all time are written
indifferently at any time.  For high genius is a day without night, a
Caspian Ocean which hath no tides.  And yet is literature in some
sort a creature of time.  Always the oracular soul is the source of
thought, but always the occasion is administered by the low
mediations of circumstance.  Religion, Love, Ambition, War, some
fierce antagonism, or it may be, some petty annoyance must break the
round of perfect circulation, or no spark, no joy, no event can be.
The poet rambling through the fields or the forest, absorbed in
contemplation to that degree, that his walk is but a pretty dream,
would never awake to precise thought, if the scream of an eagle, the
cries of a crow or curlew near his head did not break the sweet
continuity.  Nay the finest lyrics of the poet come of this unequal
parentage; the imps of matter beget such child on the soul, fair
daughter of God.  Nature mixes facts with thoughts to yield a poem.
But the gift of immortality is of the mother's side.  In the spirit
in which they are written is the date of their duration, and never in
the magnitude of the facts.  Everything lasts in proportion to its
beauty.  In proportion as it was not polluted by any wilfulness of
the writer, but flowed from his mind after the divine order of cause
and effect, it was not his but nature's, and shared the sublimity of
the sea and sky.  That which is truly told, nature herself takes in
charge against the whims and injustice of men.  For ages, Herodotus
was reckoned a credulous gossip in his descriptions of Africa, and
now the sublime silent desert testifies through the mouths of Bruce,
Lyons, Caillaud, Burckhardt, Belzoni, to the truth of the calumniated
historian.

        And yet men imagine that books are dice, and have no merit in
their fortune; that the trade and the favor of a few critics can get
one book into circulation, and defeat another; and that in the
production of these things the author has chosen and may choose to do
thus and so.  Society also wishes to assign subjects and methods to
its writers.  But neither reader nor author may intermeddle.  You
cannot reason at will in this and that other vein, but only as you
must.  You cannot make quaint combinations, and bring to the crucible
and alembic of truth things far fetched or fantastic or popular, but
your method and your subject are foreordained in all your nature, and
in all nature, or ever the earth was, or it has no worth.  All that
gives currency still to any book, advertised in the morning's
newspaper in London or Boston, is the remains of faith in the breast
of men that not adroit book makers, but the inextinguishable soul of
the universe reports of itself in articulate discourse to-day as of
old.  The ancients strongly expressed their sense of the
unmanageableness of these words of the spirit by saying, that the God
made his priest insane, took him hither and thither as leaves are
whirled by the tempest.  But we sing as we are bid.  Our inspirations
are very manageable and tame.  Death and sin have whispered in the
ear of the wild horse of Heaven, and he has become a dray and a hack.
And step by step with the entrance of this era of ease and
convenience, the belief in the proper Inspiration of man has
departed.

        Literary accomplishments, skill in grammar and rhetoric,
knowledge of books, can never atone for the want of things which
demand voice.  Literature is a poor trick when it busies itself to
make words pass for things.  The most original book in the world is
the Bible.  This old collection of the ejaculations of love and
dread, of the supreme desires and contritions of men proceeding out
of the region of the grand and eternal, by whatsoever different
mouths spoken, and through a wide extent of times and countries,
seems, especially if you add to our canon the kindred sacred writings
of the Hindoos, Persians, and Greeks, the alphabet of the nations, --
and all posterior literature either the chronicle of facts under very
inferior ideas, or, when it rises to sentiment, the combinations,
analogies, or degradations of this.  The elevation of this book may
be measured by observing, how certainly all elevation of thought
clothes itself in the words and forms of speech of that book.  For
the human mind is not now sufficiently erect to judge and correct
that scripture.  Whatever is majestically thought in a great moral
element, instantly approaches this old Sanscrit.  It is in the nature
of things that the highest originality must be moral.  The only
person, who can be entirely independent of this fountain of
literature and equal to it, must be a prophet in his own proper
person.  Shakspeare, the first literary genius of the world, the
highest in whom the moral is not the predominating element, leans on
the Bible: his poetry supposes it.  If we examine this brilliant
influence -- Shakspeare -- as it lies in our minds, we shall find it
reverent not only of the letter of this book, but of the whole frame
of society which stood in Europe upon it, deeply indebted to the
traditional morality, in short, compared with the tone of the
Prophets, _secondary_.  On the other hand, the Prophets do not imply
the existence of Shakspeare or Homer, -- advert to no books or arts,
only to dread ideas and emotions.  People imagine that the place,
which the Bible holds in the world, it owes to miracles.  It owes it
simply to the fact that it came out of a profounder depth of thought
than any other book, and the effect must be precisely proportionate.
Gibbon fancied that it was combinations of circumstances that gave
Christianity its place in history.  But in nature it takes an ounce
to balance an ounce.

        All just criticism will not only behold in literature the
action of necessary laws, but must also oversee literature itself.
The erect mind disparages all books.  What are books? it saith: they
can have no permanent value.  How obviously initial they are to their
authors.  The books of the nations, the universal books, are long ago
forgotten by those who wrote them, and one day we shall forget this
primer learning.  Literature is made up of a few ideas and a few
fables.  It is a heap of nouns and verbs enclosing an intuition or
two.  We must learn to judge books by absolute standards.  When we
are aroused to a life in ourselves, these traditional splendors of
letters grow very pale and cold.  Men seem to forget that all
literature is ephemeral, and unwillingly entertain the supposition of
its utter disappearance.  They deem not only letters in general, but
the best books in particular, parts of a preestablished harmony,
fatal, unalterable, and do not go behind Virgil and Dante, much less
behind Moses, Ezekiel, and St. John.  But no man can be a good critic
of any book, who does not read it in a wisdom which transcends the
instructions of any book, and treats the whole extant product of the
human intellect as only one age revisable and reversible by him.

        In our fidelity to the higher truth, we need not disown our
debt in our actual state of culture, in the twilights of experience
to these rude helpers.  They keep alive the memory and the hope of a
better day.  When we flout all particular books as initial merely, we
truly express the privilege of spiritual nature; but, alas, not the
fact and fortune of this low Massachusetts and Boston, of these
humble Junes and Decembers of mortal life.  Our souls are not
self-fed, but do eat and drink of chemical water and wheat.  Let us
not forget the genial miraculous force we have known to proceed from
a book.  We go musing into the vault of day and night; no
constellation shines, no muse descends, the stars are white points,
the roses brick-colored leaves, and frogs pipe, mice cheep, and
wagons creak along the road.  We return to the house and take up
Plutarch or Augustine, and read a few sentences or pages, and lo! the
air swarms with life; the front of heaven is full of fiery shapes;
secrets of magnanimity and grandeur invite us on every hand; life is
made up of them.  Such is our debt to a book.  Observe, moreover,
that we ought to credit literature with much more than the bare word
it gives us.  I have just been reading poems which now in my memory
shine with a certain steady, warm, autumnal light.  That is not in
their grammatical construction which they give me.  If I analyze the
sentences, it eludes me, but is the genius and suggestion of the
whole.  Over every true poem lingers a certain wild beauty,
immeasurable; a happiness lightsome and delicious fills the heart and
brain, -- as they say, every man walks environed by his proper
atmosphere, extending to some distance around him.  This beautiful
result must be credited to literature also in casting its account.

        In looking at the library of the Present Age we are first
struck with the fact of the immense miscellany.  It can hardly be
characterized by any species of book, for every opinion old and new,
every hope and fear, every whim and folly has an organ.  It prints a
vast carcass of tradition every year, with as much solemnity as a new
revelation.  Along with these it vents books that breathe of new
morning, that seem to heave with the life of millions, books for
which men and women peak and pine; books which take the rose out of
the cheek of him that wrote them, and give him to the midnight a sad,
solitary, diseased man; which leave no man where they found him, but
make him better or worse; and which work dubiously on society, and
seem to inoculate it with a venom before any healthy result appears.

        In order to any complete view of the literature of the present
age, an inquiry should include what it quotes, what it writes, and
what it wishes to write.  In our present attempt to enumerate some
traits of the recent literature, we shall have somewhat to offer on
each of these topics, but we cannot promise to set in very exact
order what we have to say.

        In the first place, it has all books.  It reprints the wisdom
of the world.  How can the age be a bad one, which gives me Plato and
Paul and Plutarch, St. Augustine, Spinoza, Chapman, Beaumont and
Fletcher, Donne and Sir Thomas Browne, beside its own riches?  Our
presses groan every year with new editions of all the select pieces
of the first of mankind, -- meditations, history, classifications,
opinions, epics, lyrics, which the age adopts by quoting them.  If we
should designate favorite studies in which the age delights more than
in the rest of this great mass of the permanent literature of the
human race, one or two instances would be conspicuous.  First; the
prodigious growth and influence of the genius of Shakspeare, in the
last one hundred and fifty years, is itself a fact of the first
importance.  It almost alone has called out the genius of the German
nation into an activity, which spreading from the poetic into the
scientific, religious, and philosophical domains, has made theirs now
at last the paramount intellectual influence of the world, reacting
with great energy on England and America.  And thus, and not by
mechanical diffusion, does an original genius work and spread
himself.  Society becomes an immense Shakspeare.  Not otherwise could
the poet be admired, nay, not even seen; -- not until his living,
conversing, and writing had diffused his spirit into the young and
acquiring class, so that he had multiplied himself into a thousand
sons, a thousand Shakspeares, and so understands himself.

        Secondly; the history of freedom it studies with eagerness in
civil, in religious, in philosophic history.  It has explored every
monument of Anglo-Saxon history and law, and mainly every scrap of
printed or written paper remaining from the period of the English
Commonwealth.  It has, out of England, devoted much thought and pains
to the history of philosophy.  It has groped in all nations where was
any literature for the early poetry not only the dramatic, but the
rudest lyric; for songs and ballads, the Nibelungen Lied, the poems
of Hans Sachs and Henry of Alckmaer in Germany, for the Cid in Spain,
for the rough-cast verse of the interior nations of Europe, and in
Britain for the ballads of Scotland and of Robinhood.

        In its own books also, our age celebrates its wants,
achievements, and hopes.  A wide superficial cultivation, often a
mere clearing and whitewashing, indicate the new taste in the
hitherto neglected savage, whether of the cities or the fields, to
know the arts and share the spiritual efforts of the refined.  The
time is marked by the multitude of writers.  Soldiers, sailors,
servants, nobles, princes, women, write books.  The progress of trade
and the facilities for locomotion have made the world nomadic again.
Of course it is well informed.  All facts are exposed.  The age is
not to be trifled with: it wishes to know who is who, and what is
what.  Let there be no ghost stories more.  Send Humboldt and
Bonpland to explore Mexico, Guiana, and the Cordilleras.  Let Captain
Parry learn if there be a northwest passage to America, and Mr.
Lander learn the true course of the Niger.  Puckler Muskau will go to
Algiers, and Sir Francis Head to the Pampas, to the Brunnens of
Nassau, and to Canada.  Then let us have charts true and Gazeteers
correct.  We will know where Babylon stood, and settle the topography
of the Roman Forum.  We will know whatever is to be known of
Australasia, of Japan, of Persia, of Egypt, of Timbuctoo, of
Palestine.

        Thus Christendom has become a great reading-room; and its books
have the convenient merits of the newspaper, its eminent propriety,
and its superficial exactness of information.  The age is well bred,
knows the world, has no nonsense, and herein is well distinguished
from the learned ages that preceded ours.  That there is no fool like
your learned fool, is a proverb plentifully illustrated in the
history and writings of the English and European scholars for the
half millenium that preceded the beginning of the eighteenth century.
The best heads of their time build or occupy such card-house theories
of religion, politics, and natural science, as a clever boy would now
blow away.  What stuff in Kepler, in Cardan, in Lord Bacon.
Montaigne, with all his French wit and downright sense, is little
better: a sophomore would wind him round his finger.  Some of the
Medical Remains of Lord Bacon in the book for his own use, "Of the
Prolongation of Life," will move a smile in the unpoetical
practitioner of the Medical College.  They remind us of the drugs and
practice of the leeches and enchanters of Eastern romance.  Thus we
find in his whimsical collection of astringents:

        "A stomacher of scarlet cloth; whelps or young healthy boys
applied to the stomach; hippocratic wines, so they be made of austere
materials.

        "8. To remember masticatories for the mouth.

        "9. And orange flower water to be smelled or snuffed up.

        "10. In the third hour after the sun is risen to take in air
from some high and open place with a ventilation of _rosae moschatae_
and fresh violets, and to stir the earth with infusion of wine and
mint.

        "17. To use once during supper time wine in which gold is
quenched.

        "26. Heroic desires.

        "28. To provide always an apt breakfast.

        "29. To do nothing against a man's genius."

        To the substance of some of these specifics we have no
objection.  We think we should get no better at the Medical College
to-day: and of all astringents we should reckon the best, "heroic
desires," and "doing nothing against one's genius." Yet the principle
of modern classification is different.  In the same place, it is
curious to find a good deal of pretty nonsense concerning the virtues
of the ashes of a hedgehog, the heart of an ape, the moss that
groweth upon the skull of a dead man unburied, and the comfort that
proceeds to the system from wearing beads of amber, coral, and
hartshorn; -- or from rings of sea horse teeth worn for cramp; -- to
find all these masses of moonshine side by side with the gravest and
most valuable observations.

        The good Sir Thomas Browne recommends as empirical cures for
the gout:

        "To wear shoes made of a lion's skin.

        "Try transplantation: Give poultices taken from the part to
dogs.

        "Try the magnified amulet of Muffetus, of spiders' legs worn in
a deer's skin, or of tortoises' legs cut off from the living tortoise
and wrapped up in the skin of a kid."

        Burton's Anatomy of Melancholy is an encyclopaedia of authors
and of opinions, where one who should forage for exploded theories
might easily load his panniers.  In daemonology, for example; "The
air," he says, "is not so full of flies in summer as it is at all
times of invisible devils.  They counterfeit suns and moons, and sit
on ships' masts.  They cause whirlwinds on a sudden and tempestuous
storms, which though our meteorologists generally refer to natural
causes, yet I am of Bodine's mind, they are more often caused by
those aerial devils in their several quarters.  Cardan gives much
information concerning them.  His father had one of them, an aerial
devil, bound to him for eight and twenty years; as Aggrippa's dog had
a devil tied to his collar.  Some think that Paracelsus had one
confined in his sword pommel.  Others wear them in rings.  At Hammel
in Saxony, the devil in the likeness of a pied piper carried away 130
children that were never after seen."

        All this sky-full of cobwebs is now forever swept clean away.
Another race is born.  Humboldt and Herschel, Davy and Arago, Malthus
and Bentham have arrived.  If Robert Burton should be quoted to
represent the army of scholars, who have furnished a contribution to
his moody pages, Horace Walpole, whose letters circulate in the
libraries, might be taken with some fitness to represent the spirit
of much recent literature.  He has taste, common sense, love of
facts, impatience of humbug, love of history, love of splendor, love
of justice, and the sentiment of honor among gentlemen; but no life
whatever of the higher faculties, no faith, no hope, no aspiration,
no question touching the secret of nature.

        The favorable side of this research and love of facts is the
bold and systematic criticism, which has appeared in every department
of literature.  From Wolf's attack upon the authenticity of the
Homeric Poems, dates a new epoch in learning.  Ancient history has
been found to be not yet settled.  It is to be subjected to common
sense.  It is to be cross examined.  It is to be seen, whether its
traditions will consist not with universal belief, but with universal
experience.  Niebuhr has sifted Roman history by the like methods.
Heeren has made good essays towards ascertaining the necessary facts
in the Grecian, Persian, Assyrian, Egyptian, Ethiopic, Carthaginian
nations.  English history has been analyzed by Turner, Hallam,
Brodie, Lingard, Palgrave.  Goethe has gone the circuit of human
knowledge, as Lord Bacon did before him, writing True or False on
every article.  Bentham has attempted the same scrutiny in reference
to Civil Law.  Pestalozzi out of a deep love undertook the reform of
education.  The ambition of Coleridge in England embraced the whole
problem of philosophy; to find, that is, a foundation in thought for
everything that existed in fact.  The German philosophers, Schelling,
Kant, Fichte, have applied their analysis to nature and thought with
an antique boldness.  There can be no honest inquiry, which is not
better than acquiescence.  Inquiries, which once looked grave and
vital no doubt, change their appearance very fast, and come to look
frivolous beside the later queries to which they gave occasion.

        This skeptical activity, at first directed on circumstances and
historical views deemed of great importance, soon penetrated deeper
than Rome or Egypt, than history or institutions, or the vocabulary
of metaphysics, namely, into the thinker himself, and into every
function he exercises.  The poetry and the speculation of the age are
marked by a certain philosophic turn, which discriminates them from
the works of earlier times.  The poet is not content to see how "fair
hangs the apple from the rock," "what music a sunbeam awoke in the
groves," nor of Hardiknute, how "stately steppes he east the way, and
stately steppes he west," but he now revolves, What is the apple to
me? and what the birds to me? and what is Hardiknute to me?  and what
am I?  And this is called _subjectiveness_, as the eye is withdrawn
from the object and fixed on the subject or mind.

        We can easily concede that a steadfast tendency of this sort
appears in modern literature.  It is the new consciousness of the one
mind which predominates in criticism.  It is the uprise of the soul
and not the decline.  It is founded on that insatiable demand for
unity -- the need to recognise one nature in all the variety of
objects, -- which always characterizes a genius of the first order.
Accustomed always to behold the presence of the universe in every
part, the soul will not condescend to look at any new part as a
stranger, but saith, -- "I know all already, and what art thou?  Show
me thy relations to me, to all, and I will entertain thee also."

        There is a pernicious ambiguity in the use of the term
_subjective_.  We say, in accordance with the general view I have
stated, that the single soul feels its right to be no longer
confounded with numbers, but itself to sit in judgment on history and
literature, and to summon all facts and parties before its tribunal.
And in this sense the age is subjective.

        But, in all ages, and now more, the narrow-minded have no
interest in anything but its relation to their personality.  What
will help them to be delivered from some burden, eased in some
circumstance, flattered, or pardoned, or enriched, what will help to
marry or to divorce them, to prolong or to sweeten life, is sure of
their interest, and nothing else.  Every form under the whole heaven
they behold in this most partial light or darkness of intense
selfishness, until we hate their being.  And this habit of
intellectual selfishness has acquired in our day the fine name of
subjectiveness.

        Nor is the distinction between these two habits to be found in
the circumstance of using the first person singular, or reciting
facts and feelings of personal history.  A man may say _I_, and never
refer to himself as an individual; and a man may recite passages of
his life with no feeling of egotism.  Nor need a man have a vicious
subjectiveness because he deals in abstract propositions.

        But the criterion, which discriminates these two habits in the
poet's mind, is the tendency of his composition; namely, whether it
leads us to nature, or to the person of the writer.  The great always
introduce us to facts; small men introduce us always to themselves.
The great man, even whilst he relates a private fact personal to him,
is really leading us away from him to an universal experience.  His
own affection is in nature, in _What is_, and, of course, all his
communication leads outward to it, starting from whatsoever point.
The great never with their own consent become a load on the minds
they instruct.  The more they draw us to them, the farther from them
or more independent of them we are, because they have brought us to
the knowledge of somewhat deeper than both them and us.  The great
never hinder us; for, as the Jews had a custom of laying their beds
north and south, founded on an opinion that the path of God was east
and west, and they would not desecrate by the infirmities of sleep
the Divine circuits, so the activity of the good is coincident with
the axle of the world, with the sun and moon, with the course of the
rivers and of the winds, with the stream of laborers in the street,
and with all the activity and well being of the race.  The great lead
us to nature, and, in our age, to metaphysical nature, to the
invisible awful facts, to moral abstractions, which are not less
nature than is a river or a coal mine; nay, they are far more nature,
but its essence and soul.

        But the weak and evil, led also to analyze, saw nothing in
thought but luxury.  Thought for the selfish became selfish.  They
invited us to contemplate nature, and showed us an abominable self.
Would you know the genius of the writer?  Do not enumerate his
talents or his feats, but ask thyself, What spirit is he of?  Do
gladness and hope and fortitude flow from his page into thy heart?
Has he led thee to nature because his own soul was too happy in
beholding her power and love; or is his passion for the wilderness
only the sensibility of the sick, the exhibition of a talent, which
only shines whilst you praise it; which has no root in the character,
and can thus minister to the vanity but not to the happiness of the
possessor; and which derives all its eclat from our conventional
education, but would not make itself intelligible to the wise man of
another age or country?  The water we wash with never speaks of
itself, nor does fire, or wind, or tree.  Neither does the noble
natural man: he yields himself to your occasion and use; but his act
expresses a reference to universal good.

        Another element of the modern poetry akin to this subjective
tendency, or rather the direction of that same on the question of
resources, is, the Feeling of the Infinite.  Of the perception now
fast becoming a conscious fact, -- that there is One Mind, and that
all the powers and privileges which lie in any, lie in all; that I as
a man may claim and appropriate whatever of true or fair or good or
strong has anywhere been exhibited; that Moses and Confucius,
Montaigne and Leibnitz are not so much individuals as they are parts
of man and parts of me, and my intelligence proves them my own, --
literature is far the best expression.  It is true, this is not the
only nor the obvious lesson it teaches.  A selfish commerce and
government have caught the eye and usurped the hand of the masses.
It is not to be contested that selfishness and the senses write the
laws under which we live, and that the street seems to be built, and
the men and women in it moving not in reference to pure and grand
ends, but rather to very short and sordid ones.  Perhaps no
considerable minority, perhaps no one man leads a quite clean and
lofty life.  What then?  We concede in sadness the fact.  But we say
that these low customary ways are not all that survives in human
beings.  There is that in us which mutters, and that which groans,
and that which triumphs, and that which aspires.  There are facts on
which men of the world superciliously smile, which are worth all
their trade and politics, the impulses, namely, which drive young men
into gardens and solitary places, and cause extravagant gestures,
starts, distortions of the countenance, and passionate exclamations;
sentiments, which find no aliment or language for themselves on the
wharves, in court, or market, but which are soothed by silence, by
darkness, by the pale stars, and the presence of nature.  All over
the modern world the educated and susceptible have betrayed their
discontent with the limits of our municipal life, and with the
poverty of our dogmas of religion and philosophy.  They betray this
impatience by fleeing for resource to a conversation with nature --
which is courted in a certain moody and exploring spirit, as if they
anticipated a more intimate union of man with the world than has been
known in recent ages.  Those who cannot tell what they desire or
expect, still sigh and struggle with indefinite thoughts and vast
wishes.  The very child in the nursery prattles mysticism, and doubts
and philosophizes.  A wild striving to express a more inward and
infinite sense characterizes the works of every art.  The music of
Beethoven is said by those who understand it, to labor with vaster
conceptions and aspirations than music has attempted before.  This
Feeling of the Infinite has deeply colored the poetry of the period.
This new love of the vast, always native in Germany, was imported
into France by De Stael, appeared in England in Coleridge,
Wordsworth, Byron, Shelley, Felicia Hemans, and finds a most genial
climate in the American mind.  Scott and Crabbe, who formed
themselves on the past, had none of this tendency; their poetry is
objective.  In Byron, on the other hand, it predominates; but in
Byron it is blind, it sees not its true end -- an infinite good,
alive and beautiful, a life nourished on absolute beatitudes,
descending into nature to behold itself reflected there.  His will is
perverted, he worships the accidents of society, and his praise of
nature is thieving and selfish.

        Nothing certifies the prevalence of this taste in the people
more than the circulation of the poems, -- one would say, most
incongruously united by some bookseller, -- of Coleridge, Shelley,
and Keats.  The only unity is in the subjectiveness and the
aspiration common to the three writers.  Shelley, though a poetic
mind, is never a poet.  His muse is uniformly imitative; all his
poems composite.  A good English scholar he is, with ear, taste, and
memory, much more, he is a character full of noble and prophetic
traits; but imagination, the original, authentic fire of the bard, he
has not.  He is clearly modern, and shares with Richter,
Chateaubriand, Manzoni, and Wordsworth, the feeling of the infinite,
which so labors for expression in their different genius.  But all
his lines are arbitrary, not necessary.  When we read poetry, the
mind asks, -- Was this verse one of twenty which the author might
have written as well; or is this what that man was created to say?
But, whilst every line of the true poet will be genuine, he is in a
boundless power and freedom to say a million things.  And the reason
why he can say one thing well, is because his vision extends to the
sight of all things, and so he describes each as one who knows many
and all.

        The fame of Wordsworth is a leading fact in modern literature,
when it is considered how hostile his genius at first seemed to the
reigning taste, and with what feeble poetic talents his great and
steadily growing dominion has been established.  More than any other
poet his success has been not his own, but that of the idea which he
shared with his coevals, and which he has rarely succeeded in
adequately expressing.  The Excursion awakened in every lover of
nature the right feeling.  We saw stars shine, we felt the awe of
mountains, we heard the rustle of the wind in the grass, and knew
again the ineffable secret of solitude.  It was a great joy.  It was
nearer to nature than anything we had before.  But the interest of
the poem ended almost with the narrative of the influences of nature
on the mind of the Boy, in the first book.  Obviously for that
passage the poem was written, and with the exception of this and of a
few strains of the like character in the sequel, the whole poem was
dull.  Here was no poem, but here was poetry, and a sure index where
the subtle muse was about to pitch her tent and find the argument of
her song.  It was the human soul in these last ages striving for a
just publication of itself.  Add to this, however, the great praise
of Wordsworth, that more than any other contemporary bard he is
pervaded with a reverence of somewhat higher than (conscious)
thought.  There is in him that property common to all great poets, a
wisdom of humanity, which is superior to any talents which they
exert.  It is the wisest part of Shakspeare and of Milton.  For they
are poets by the free course which they allow to the informing soul,
which through their eyes beholdeth again and blesseth the things
which it hath made.  The soul is superior to its knowledge, wiser
than any of its works.

        With the name of Wordsworth rises to our recollection the name
of his contemporary and friend, Walter Savage Landor -- a man working
in a very different and peculiar spirit, yet one whose genius and
accomplishments deserve a wiser criticism than we have yet seen
applied to them, and the rather that his name does not readily
associate itself with any school of writers.  Of Thomas Carlyle, also
we shall say nothing at this time, since the quality and the energy
of his influence on the youth of this country will require at our
hands ere long a distinct and faithful acknowledgment.

        But of all men he, who has united in himself and that in the
most extraordinary degree the tendencies of the era, is the German
poet, naturalist, and philosopher, Goethe.  Whatever the age
inherited or invented, he made his own.  He has owed to Commerce and
to the victories of the Understanding, all their spoils.  Such was
his capacity, that the magazines of the world's ancient or modern
wealth, which arts and intercourse and skepticism could command -- he
wanted them all.  Had there been twice so much, he could have used it
as well.  Geologist, mechanic, merchant, chemist, king, radical,
painter, composer, -- all worked for him, and a thousand men seemed
to look through his eyes.  He learned as readily as other men
breathe.  Of all the men of this time, not one has seemed so much at
home in it as he.  He was not afraid to live.  And in him this
encyclopaedia of facts, which it has been the boast of the age to
compile, wrought an equal effect.  He was knowing; he was brave; he
was clean from all narrowness; he has a perfect propriety and taste,
-- a quality by no means common to the German writers.  Nay, since
the earth, as we said, had become a reading-room, the new
opportunities seem to have aided him to be that resolute realist he
is, and seconded his sturdy determination to see things for what they
are.  To look at him, one would say, there was never an observer
before.  What sagacity, what industry of observation! to read his
record is a frugality of time, for you shall find no word that does
not stand for a thing, and he is of that comprehension, which can see
the value of truth.  His love of nature has seemed to give a new
meaning to that word.  There was never man more domesticated in this
world than he.  And he is an apology for the analytic spirit of the
period, because, of his analysis, always wholes were the result.  All
conventions, all traditions he rejected.  And yet he felt his entire
right and duty to stand before and try and judge every fact in
nature.  He thought it necessary to dot round with his own pen the
entire sphere of knowables; and for many of his stories, this seems
the only reason: Here is a piece of humanity I had hitherto omitted
to sketch; -- take this.  He does not say so in syllables, -- yet a
sort of conscientious feeling he had to be _up_ to the universe, is
the best account and apology for many of them.  He shared also the
subjectiveness of the age, and that too in both the senses I have
discriminated.  With the sharpest eye for form, color, botany,
engraving, medals, persons, and manners, he never stopped at surface,
but pierced the purpose of a thing, and studied to reconcile that
purpose with his own being.  What he could so reconcile was good;
what he could not, was false.  Hence a certain greatness encircles
every fact he treats; for to him it has a soul, an eternal reason why
it was so, and not otherwise.  This is the secret of that deep
realism, which went about among all objects he beheld, to find the
cause why they must be what they are.  It was with him a favorite
task to find a theory of every institution, custom, art, work of art,
which he observes.  Witness his explanation of the Italian mode of
reckoning the hours of the day, as growing out of the Italian
climate; of the obelisk of Egypt, as growing out of a common natural
fracture in the granite parallelopiped in Upper Egypt; of the Doric
architecture, and the Gothic; of the Venetian music of the gondolier
originating in the habit of the fishers' wives of the Lido singing to
their husbands on the sea; of the Amphitheatre, which is the
enclosure of the natural cup of heads that arranges itself round
every spectacle in the street; of the coloring of Titian and Paul
Veronese, which one may verify in the common daylight in Venice every
afternoon; of the Carnival at Rome; of the domestic rural
architecture in Italy; and many the like examples.

        But also that other vicious subjectiveness, that vice of the
time, infected him also.  We are provoked with his Olympian
self-complacency, the patronizing air with which he vouchsafes to
tolerate the genius and performances of other mortals, "the good
Hiller," "our excellent Kant," "the friendly Wieland," &c. &c.  There
is a good letter from Wieland to Merck, in which Wieland relates that
Goethe read to a select party his journal of a tour in Switzerland
with the Grand Duke, and their passage through Valois and over the
St. Gothard.  "It was," says Wieland, "as good as Xenophon's
Anabasis.  The piece is one of his most masterly productions, and is
thought and written with the greatness peculiar to him.  The fair
hearers were enthusiastic at the nature in this piece; I liked the
sly art in the composition, whereof they saw nothing, still better.
It is a true poem, so concealed is the art too.  But what most
remarkably in this as in all his other works distinguishes him from
Homer and Shakspeare, is, that the Me, the _Ille ego_, everywhere
glimmers through, although without any boasting and with an infinite
fineness." This subtle element of egotism in Goethe certainly does
not seem to deform his compositions, but to lower the moral influence
of the man.  He differs from all the great in the total want of
frankness.  Whoso saw Milton, whoso saw Shakspeare, saw them do their
best, and utter their whole heart manlike among their brethren.  No
man was permitted to call Goethe brother.  He hid himself, and worked
always to astonish, which is an egotism, and therefore little.

        If we try Goethe by the ordinary canons of criticism, we should
say that his thinking is of great altitude, and all level; -- not a
succession of summits, but a high Asiatic table land.  Dramatic
power, the rarest talent in literature, he has very little.  He has
an eye constant to the fact of life, and that never pauses in its
advance.  But the great felicities, the miracles of poetry, he has
never.  It is all design with him, just thought and instructed
expression, analogies, allusion, illustration, which knowledge and
correct thinking supply; but of Shakspeare and the transcendant muse,
no syllable.  Yet in the court and law to which we ordinarily speak,
and without adverting to absolute standards, we claim for him the
praise of truth, of fidelity to his intellectual nature.  He is the
king of all scholars.  In these days and in this country, where the
scholars are few and idle, where men read easy books and sleep after
dinner, it seems as if no book could so safely be put in the hands of
young men as the letters of Goethe, which attest the incessant
activity of this man to eighty years, in an endless variety of
studies with uniform cheerfulness and greatness of mind.  They cannot
be read without shaming us into an emulating industry.  Let him have
the praise of the love of truth.  We think, when we contemplate the
stupendous glory of the world, that it were life enough for one man
merely to lift his hands and cry with St. Augustine, "Wrangle who
pleases, I will wonder." Well, this he did.  Here was a man, who, in
the feeling that the thing itself was so admirable as to leave all
comment behind, went up and down from object to object, lifting the
veil from everyone, and did no more.  What he said of Lavater, may
trulier be said of him, that "it was fearful to stand in the presence
of one, before whom all the boundaries within which nature has
circumscribed our being were laid flat." His are the bright and
terrible eyes, which meet the modern student in every sacred chapel
of thought, in every public enclosure.

        But now, that we may not seem to dodge the question which all
men ask, nor pay a great man so ill a compliment as to praise him
only in the conventional and comparative speech, let us honestly
record our thought upon the total worth and influence of this genius.
Does he represent not only the achievement of that age in which he
lived, but that which it would be and is now becoming?  And what
shall we think of that absence of the moral sentiment, that singular
equivalence to him of good and evil in action, which discredits his
compositions to the pure?  The spirit of his biography, of his poems,
of his tales, is identical, and we may here set down by way of
comment on his genius the impressions recently awakened in us by the
story of Wilhelm Meister.

        All great men have written proudly, nor cared to explain.  They
knew that the intelligent reader would come at last, and would thank
them.  So did Dante, so did Machiavel.  Goethe has done this in
Meister.  We can fancy him saying to himself; -- There are poets
enough of the ideal; let me paint the Actual, as, after years of
dreams, it will still appear and reappear to wise men.  That all
shall right itself in the long Morrow, I may well allow, and my novel
may easily wait for the same regeneration.  The age, that can damn it
as false and falsifying, will see that it is deeply one with the
genius and history of all the centuries.  I have given my characters
a bias to error.  Men have the same.  I have let mischances befall
instead of good fortune.  They do so daily.  And out of many vices
and misfortunes, I have let a great success grow, as I had known in
my own and many other examples.  Fierce churchmen and effeminate
aspirants will chide and hate my name, but every keen beholder of
life will justify my truth, and will acquit me of prejudging the
cause of humanity by painting it with this morose fidelity.  To a
profound soul is not austere truth the sweetest flattery?

        Yes, O Goethe! but the ideal is truer than the actual.  That is
ephemeral, but this changes not.  Moreover, because nature is moral,
that mind only can see, in which the same order entirely obtains.  An
interchangeable Truth, Beauty, and Goodness, each wholly interfused
in the other, must make the humors of that eye, which would see
causes reaching to their last effect and reproducing the world
forever.  The least inequality of mixture, the excess of one element
over the other, in that degree diminishes the transparency of things,
makes the world opaque to the observer, and destroys so far the value
of his experience.  No particular gifts can countervail this defect.
In reading Meister, I am charmed with the insight; to use a phrase of
Ben Jonson's, "it is rammed with life." I find there actual men and
women even too faithfully painted.  I am, moreover, instructed in the
possibility of a highly accomplished society, and taught to look for
great talent and culture under a grey coat.  But this is all.  The
limits of artificial society are never quite out of sight.  The
vicious conventions, which hem us in like prison walls, and which the
poet should explode at his touch, stand for all they are worth in the
newspaper.  I am never lifted above myself.  I am not transported out
of the dominion of the senses, or cheered with an infinite
tenderness, or armed with a grand trust.

        Goethe, then, must be set down as the poet of the Actual, not
of the Ideal; the poet of limitation, not of possibility; of this
world, and not of religion and hope; in short, if I may say so, the
poet of prose, and not of poetry.  He accepts the base doctrine of
Fate, and gleans what straggling joys may yet remain out of its ban.
He is like a banker or a weaver with a passion for the country, he
steals out of the hot streets before sunrise, or after sunset, or on
a rare holiday, to get a draught of sweet air, and a gaze at the
magnificence of summer, but dares not break from his slavery and lead
a man's life in a man's relation to nature.  In that which should be
his own place, he feels like a truant, and is scourged back presently
to his task and his cell.  Poetry is with Goethe thus external, the
gilding of the chain, the mitigation of his fate; but the muse never
essays those thunder-tones, which cause to vibrate the sun and the
moon, which dissipate by dreadful melody all this iron network of
circumstance, and abolish the old heavens and the old earth before
the free-will or Godhead of man.  That Goethe had not a moral
perception proportionate to his other powers, is not then merely a
circumstance, as we might relate of a man that he had or had not the
sense of tune or an eye for colors; but it is the cardinal fact of
health or disease; since, lacking this, he failed in the high sense
to be a creator, and with divine endowments drops by irreversible
decree into the common history of genius.  He was content to fall
into the track of vulgar poets, and spend on common aims his splendid
endowments, and has declined the office proffered to now and then a
man in many centuries in the power of his genius -- of a Redeemer of
the human mind.  He has written better than other poets, only as his
talent was subtler, but the ambition of creation he refused.  Life
for him is prettier, easier, wiser, decenter, has a gem or two more
on its robe, but its old eternal burden is not relieved; no drop of
healthier blood flows yet in its veins.  Let him pass.  Humanity must
wait for its physician still at the side of the road, and confess as
this man goes out that they have served it better, who assured it out
of the innocent hope in their hearts that a Physician will come, than
this majestic Artist, with all the treasuries of wit, of science, and
of power at his command.

        The criticism, which is not so much spoken as felt in reference
to Goethe, instructs us directly in the hope of literature.  We feel
that a man gifted like him should not leave the world as he found it.
It is true, though somewhat sad, that every fine genius teaches us
how to blame himself.  Being so much, we cannot forgive him for not
being more.  When one of these grand monads is incarnated, whom
nature seems to design for eternal men and draw to her bosom, we
think that the old wearinesses of Europe and Asia, the trivial forms
of daily life will now end, and a new morning break on us all.  What
is Austria?  What is England?  What is our graduated and petrified
social scale of ranks and employments?  Shall not a poet redeem us
from these idolatries, and pale their legendary lustre before the
fires of the Divine Wisdom which burn in his heart?  All that in our
sovereign moments each of us has divined of the powers of thought,
all the hints of omnipresence and energy which we have caught, this
man should unfold and constitute facts.

        And this is the insatiable craving which alternately saddens
and gladdens men at this day.  The Doctrine of the Life of Man
established after the truth through all his faculties; -- this is the
thought which the literature of this hour meditates and labors to
say.  This is that which tunes the tongue and fires the eye and sits
in the silence of the youth.  Verily it will not long want articulate
and melodious expression.  There is nothing in the heart but comes
presently to the lips.  The very depth of the sentiment, which is the
author of all the cutaneous life we see, is guarantee for the riches
of science and of song in the age to come.  He, who doubts whether
this age or this country can yield any contribution to the literature
of the world, only betrays his own blindness to the necessities of
the human soul.  Has the power of poetry ceased, or the need?  Have
the eyes ceased to see that which they would have, and which they
have not?  Have they ceased to see other eyes?  Are there no lonely,
anxious, wondering children, who must tell their tale?  Are we not
evermore whipped by thoughts;

        "In sorrow steeped and steeped in love
        Of thoughts not yet incarnated?"
 
        The heart beats in this age as of old, and the passions are
busy as ever.  Nature has not lost one ringlet of her beauty, one
impulse of resistance and valor.  From the necessity of loving none
are exempt, and he that loves must utter his desires.  A charm as
radiant as beauty ever beamed, a love that fainteth at the sight of
its object, is new to-day.

                 "The world does not run smoother than of old,
                 There are sad haps that must be told."

         Man is not so far lost but that he suffers ever the great
Discontent, which is the elegy of his loss and the prediction of his
recovery.  In the gay saloon he laments that these figures are not
what Raphael and Guercino painted.  Withered though he stand and
trifler though he be, the august spirit of the world looks out from
his eyes.  In his heart he knows the ache of spiritual pain, and his
thought can animate the sea and land.  What then shall hinder the
Genius of the time from speaking its thought?  It cannot be silent,
if it would.  It will write in a higher spirit, and a wider
knowledge, and with a grander practical aim, than ever yet guided the
pen of poet.  It will write the annals of a changed world, and record
the descent of principles into practice, of love into Government, of
love into Trade.  It will describe the new heroic life of man, the
now unbelieved possibility of simple living and of clean and noble
relations with men.  Religion will bind again these that were
sometime frivolous, customary, enemies, skeptics, self-seekers, into
a joyful reverence for the circumambient Whole, and that which was
ecstasy shall become daily bread.

 

                       _New Poetry_

        The tendencies of the times are so democratical, that we shall
soon have not so much as a pulpit or raised platform in any church or
townhouse, but each person, who is moved to address any public
assembly, will speak from the floor.  The like revolution in
literature is now giving importance to the portfolio over the book.
Only one man in the thousand may print a book, but one in ten or one
in five may inscribe his thoughts, or at least with short commentary
his favorite readings in a private journal.  The philosophy of the
day has long since broached a more liberal doctrine of the poetic
faculty than our fathers held, and reckons poetry the right and power
of every man to whose culture justice is done.  We own that, though
we were trained in a stricter school of literary faith, and were in
all our youth inclined to the enforcement of the straitest
restrictions on the admission of candidates to the Parnassian
fraternity, and denied the name of poetry to every composition in
which the workmanship and the material were not equally excellent, in
our middle age we have grown lax, and have learned to find pleasure
in verses of a ruder strain, -- to enjoy _verses of society_, or
those effusions which in persons of a happy nature are the easy and
unpremeditated translation of their thoughts and feelings into rhyme.
This new taste for a certain private and household poetry, for
somewhat less pretending than the festal and solemn verses which are
written for the nations, really indicates, we suppose, that a new
style of poetry exists.  The number of writers has increased.  Every
child has been taught the tongues.  The universal communication of
the arts of reading and writing has brought the works of the great
poets into every house, and made all ears familiar with the poetic
forms.  The progress of popular institutions has favored
self-respect, and broken down that terror of the great, which once
imposed awe and hesitation on the talent of the masses of society.  A
wider epistolary intercourse ministers to the ends of sentiment and
reflection than ever existed before; the practice of writing diaries
is becoming almost general; and every day witnesses new attempts to
throw into verse the experiences of private life.

 
        What better omen of true progress can we ask than an increasing
intellectual and moral interest of men in each other?  What can be
better for the republic than that the Capitol, the White House, and
the Court House are becoming of less importance than the farm-house
and the book-closet?  If we are losing our interest in public men,
and finding that their spell lay in number and size only, and
acquiring instead a taste for the depths of thought and emotion as
they may be sounded in the soul of the citizen or the countryman,
does it not replace man for the state, and character for official
power?  Men should be treated with solemnity; and when they come to
chant their private griefs and doubts and joys, they have a new scale
by which to compute magnitude and relation.  Art is the noblest
consolation of calamity.  The poet is compensated for his defects in
the street and in society, if in his chamber he has turned his
mischance into noble numbers.

        Is there not room then for a new department in poetry, namely,
_Verses of the Portfolio_?  We have fancied that we drew greater
pleasure from some manuscript verses than from printed ones of equal
talent.  For there was herein the charm of character; they were
confessions; and the faults, the imperfect parts, the fragmentary
verses, the halting rhymes, had a worth beyond that of a high finish;
for they testified that the writer was more man than artist, more
earnest than vain; that the thought was too sweet and sacred to him,
than that he should suffer his ears to hear or his eyes to see a
superficial defect in the expression.

        The characteristic of such verses is, that being not written
for publication, they lack that finish which the conventions of
literature require of authors.  But if poetry of this kind has merit,
we conceive that the prescription which demands a rhythmical polish
may be easily set aside; and when a writer has outgrown the state of
thought which produced the poem, the interest of letters is served by
publishing it imperfect, as we preserve studies, torsos, and blocked
statues of the great masters.  For though we should be loath to see
the wholesome conventions, to which we have alluded, broken down by a
general incontinence of publication, and every man's and woman's
diary flying into the bookstores, yet it is to be considered, on the
other hand, that men of genius are often more incapable than others
of that elaborate execution which criticism exacts.  Men of genius in
general are, more than others, incapable of any perfect exhibition,
because however agreeable it may be to them to act on the public, it
is always a secondary aim.  They are humble, self-accusing, moody
men, whose worship is toward the Ideal Beauty, which chooses to be
courted not so often in perfect hymns, as in wild ear-piercing
ejaculations, or in silent musings.  Their face is forward, and their
heart is in this heaven.  By so much are they disqualified for a
perfect success in any particular performance to which they can give
only a divided affection.  But the man of talents has every advantage
in the competition.  He can give that cool and commanding attention
to the thing to be done, that shall secure its just performance.  Yet
are the failures of genius better than the victories of talent; and
we are sure that some crude manuscript poems have yielded us a more
sustaining and a more stimulating diet, than many elaborated and
classic productions.

        We have been led to these thoughts by reading some verses,
which were lately put into our hands by a friend with the remark,
that they were the production of a youth, who had long passed out of
the mood in which he wrote them, so that they had become quite dead
to him.  Our first feeling on reading them was a lively joy.  So then
the Muse is neither dead nor dumb, but has found a voice in these
cold Cisatlantic States.  Here is poetry which asks no aid of
magnitude or number, of blood or crime, but finds theatre enough in
the first field or brookside, breadth and depth enough in the flow of
its own thought.  Here is self-repose, which to our mind is stabler
than the Pyramids; here is self-respect which leads a man to date
from his heart more proudly than from Rome.  Here is love which sees
through surface, and adores the gentle nature and not the costume.
Here is religion, which is not of the Church of England, nor of the
Church of Boston.  Here is the good wise heart, which sees that the
end of culture is strength and cheerfulness.  In an age too which
tends with so strong an inclination to the philosophical muse, here
is poetry more purely intellectual than any American verses we have
yet seen, distinguished from all competition by two merits; the
fineness of perception; and the poet's trust in his own genius to
that degree, that there is an absence of all conventional imagery,
and a bold use of that which the moment's mood had made sacred to
him, quite careless that it might be sacred to no other, and might
even be slightly ludicrous to the first reader.

        We proceed to give our readers some selections, taken without
much order from this rich pile of manuscript.  We first find the poet
in his boat.

        BOAT SONG

                        THE RIVER calmly flows,
                Through shining banks, through lonely glen,
        Where the owl shrieks, though ne'er the cheer of men
                Has stirred its mute repose,
        Still if you should walk there, you would go there again.

                        The stream is well alive;
                Another passive world you see,
        Where downward grows the form of every tree;
                Like soft light clouds they thrive:
        Like them let us in our pure loves reflected be.

                        A yellow gleam is thrown
                Into the secrets of that maze
        Of tangled trees, which late shut out our gaze,
                Refusing to be known;
        It must its privacy unclose, -- its glories blaze.
 
                        Sweet falls the summer air
                Over her frame who sails with me:
        Her way like that is beautifully free,
                Her nature far more rare,
        And is her constant heart of virgin purity.

                        A quivering star is seen
                Keeping his watch above the hill,
        Though from the sun's retreat small light is still
                Poured on earth's saddening mien: --
        We all are tranquilly obeying Evening's will.

                        Thus ever love the POWER;
                To simplest  thoughts dispose the mind;
        In each obscure event a worship find
                Like that of this dim hour, --
        In lights, and airs, and trees, and in all human kind.

                        We smoothly glide below
                The faintly glimmering worlds of light:
        Day has a charm, and this deceptive night
                Brings a mysterious show; --
        He shadows our dear earth, -- but his cool stars are white.

        _Two Years before the Mast._ A Personal Narrative of Life at
Sea.
        New York: Harper and Brothers. 12mo. pp. 483.

        This is a voice from the forecastle.  Though a narrative of
literal, prosaic truth, it possesses something of the romantic charm
of Robinson Crusoe.  Few more interesting chapters of the literature
of the sea have ever fallen under our notice.  The author left the
halls of the University for the deck of a merchant vessel, exchanging
"the tight dress coat, silk cap, and kid gloves of an undergraduate
at Cambridge, for the loose entofDocumentsduck trowsers, checked
shirt, and tarpaulin hat of a sailor," and here presents us the
fruits of his voyage.  His book will have a wide circulation; it will
be praised in the public prints; we shall be told that it does honor
to his head and heart; but we trust that it will do much more than
this; that it will open the eyes of many to the condition of the
sailor, to the fearful waste of man, by which the luxuries of foreign
climes are made to increase the amount of commercial wealth.  This
simple narrative, stamped with deep sincerity, and often displaying
an unstudied, pathetic eloquence, may lead to reflections, which mere
argument and sentimental appeals do not call forth.  It will serve to
hasten the day of reckoning between society and the sailor, which,
though late, will not fail to come.

        _Social Destiny of Man: or Association and Reorganization of
Industry._
        By ALBERT BRISBANE. Philadelphia. 12mo. pp. 480.

        This work is designed to give a condensed view of the system of
M. Fourier, for the improvement and elevation of productive industry.
It will be read with deep interest by a large class of our
population.  The name of Fourier may be placed at the head of modern
thinkers, whose attention has been given to the practical evils of
society and the means of their removal.  His general principles
should be cautiously separated from the details which accompany their
exposition, many of which are so exclusively adapted to the French
character, as to prejudice their reception with persons of opposite
habits and associations.  The great question, which he brings up for
discussion, concerns the union of labor and capital in the same
individuals, by a system of combined and organized industry.  This
question, it is more than probable, will not be set aside at once,
whenever its importance is fully perceived, and those who are
interested in its decision will find materials of no small value in
the writings of M. Fourier.  They may be regarded, in some sense, as
the scientific analysis of the cooperative principle, which has,
within a few years past, engaged the public attention in England, and
in certain cases, received a successful, practical application.

 

        _Michael Angelo, considered as a Philosophic Poet, with
Translations._
        By JOHN EDWARD TAYLOR. London: Saunders & Otley, Conduit
Street. 1840.

        We welcome this little book with joy, and a hope that it may be
republished in Boston.  It would find, probably, but a small circle
of readers, but that circle would be more ready to receive and prize
it than the English public for whom it was intended, if we may judge
by the way in which Mr. Taylor, all through his prefatory essay, has
considered it necessary to apologize for, or, at least, explain views
very commonly received among ourselves.

        The essay is interesting from the degree of acquaintance it
exhibits with some of those great ones, who have held up the highest
aims to the soul, and from the degree of insight which reverence and
delicacy of mind have given to the author.  From every line comes the
soft breath of green pastures where "walk the good shepherds."

        Of the sonnets, we doubt the possibility of making good
translations into English.  No gift of the Muse is more injured by
change of form than the Italian sonnet.  As those of Petrarch will
not bear it, from their infinite grace, those of Dante from their
mystic and subtle majesty; so these of Angelo, from the rugged
naivete with which they are struck off from the mind, as huge
splinters of stone might be from some vast block, can never be "done
into English," as the old translators, with an intelligent modesty,
were wont to write of their work.  The grand thought is not quite
evaporated in the process, but the image of the stern and stately
writer is lost.  We do not know again such words as "concetto,"
"superna" in their English representatives.

        But since a knowledge of the Italian language is not so common
an attainment as could be wished, we ought to be grateful for this
attempt to extend the benefit of these noble expressions of the faith
which inspired one of the most full and noble lives that has ever
redeemed and encouraged man.

 
        Fidelity must be the highest merit of these translations; for
not even an Angelo could translate his peer.  This, so far as we have
looked at them, they seem to possess.  And even in the English dress,
we think none, to whom they are new, can read the sonnets, --

        "Veggio nel volto tuo col pensier mie."
        "S'un casto amor, s'una pieta superna."
        "La vita del mio amor non e cuor mio."
 
        and others of the same pure religion, without a delight which
shall
 
        "Cast a light upon the day,
        A light which will not go away,
        A sweet forewarning."

        We hope they may have the opportunity.  It is a very little
book with a great deal in it, and five hundred copies will sell in
two years.

        We add Mr. Taylor's little preface, which happily expresses his
design.

        "The remarks on the poetry and philosophy of Michael Angelo,
which are prefixed to these translations have been collected and are
now published in the hope that they may invite the student of
literature to trace the relation which unites the efforts of the pure
intelligence and the desires of the heart to their highest earthly
accomplishment under the complete forms of Art.  For the example of
so eminent a mind, watched and judged not only by its finished works,
but, as it were, in its growth and from its inner source of Love and
Knowledge cannot but enlarge the range of our sympathy for the best
powers and productions of man.  And if these pages should meet with
any readers inclined, like their writer, to seek and to admire the
veiled truth and solemn beauty of the eldertime, they will add their
humble testimony to the fact, that whatever be the purpose and
tendencies of the time we live in, we are not all unmindful of the
better part of our inheritance in this world."

 
 
        _Essays and Poems_. By JONES VERY. Boston: C. C. Little and
        James Brown.

        This little volume would have received an earlier notice, if we
had been at all careful to proclaim our favorite books.  The genius
of this book is religious, and reaches an extraordinary depth of
sentiment.  The author, plainly a man of a pure and kindly temper,
casts himself into the state of the high and transcendental obedience
to the inward Spirit.  He has apparently made up his mind to follow
all its leadings, though he should be taxed with absurdity or even
with insanity.  In this enthusiasm he writes most of these verses,
which rather flow through him than from him.  There is no
_composition_, no elaboration, no artifice in the structure of the
rhyme, no variety in the imagery; in short, no pretension to literary
merit, for this would be departure from his singleness, and followed
by loss of insight.  He is not at liberty even to correct these
unpremeditated poems for the press; but if another will publish them,
he offers no objection.  In this way they have come into the world,
and as yet have hardly begun to be known.  With the exception of the
few first poems, which appear to be of an earlier date, all these
verses bear the unquestionable stamp of grandeur.  They are the
breathings of a certain entranced devotion, which one would say,
should be received with affectionate and sympathizing curiosity by
all men, as if no recent writer had so much to show them of what is
most their own.  They are as sincere a litany as the Hebrew songs of
David or Isaiah, and only less than they, because indebted to the
Hebrew muse for their tone and genius.  This makes the singularity of
the book, namely, that so pure an utterance of the most domestic and
primitive of all sentiments should in this age of revolt and
experiment use once more the popular religious language, and so show
itself secondary and morbid.  These sonnets have little range of
topics, no extent of observation, no playfulness; there is even a
certain torpidity in the concluding lines of some of them, which
reminds one of church hymns; but, whilst they flow with great
sweetness, they have the sublime unity of the Decalogue or the Code
of Menu, and if as monotonous, yet are they almost as pure as the
sounds of Surrounding Nature.  We gladly insert from a newspaper the
following sonnet, which appeared since the volume was printed.

        THE BARBERRY BUSH.
 
        The bush that has most briers and bitter fruit,
        Wait till the frost has turned its green leaves red,
        Its sweetened berries will thy palate suit,
        And thou may'st find e'en there a homely bread.
        Upon the hills of Salem scattered wide,
        Their yellow blossoms gain the eye in Spring;
        And straggling e'en upon the turnpike's side,
        Their ripened branches to your hand they bring,
        I 've plucked them oft in boyhood's early hour,
        That then I gave such name, and thought it true;
        But now I know that other fruit as sour
        Grows on what now thou callest _Me_ and _You_;
        Yet, wilt thou wait the autumn that I see,
        Will sweeter taste than these red berries be.

 
        _Walter Savage Landor_

        We sometimes meet in a stage coach in New England an erect
muscular man, with fresh complexion and a smooth hat, whose nervous
speech instantly betrays the English traveller; -- a man nowise
cautious to conceal his name or that of his native country, or his
very slight esteem for the persons and the country that surround him.
When Mr. Bull rides in an American coach, he speaks quick and strong,
he is very ready to confess his ignorance of everything about him,
persons, manners, customs, politics, geography.  He wonders that the
Americans should build with wood, whilst all this stone is lying in
the roadside, and is astonished to learn that a wooden house may last
a hundred years; nor will he remember the fact as many minutes after
it has been told him; he wonders they do not make elder-wine and
cherry-bounce, since here are cherries, and every mile is crammed
with elder bushes.  He has never seen a good horse in America, nor a
good coach, nor a good inn.  Here is very good earth and water, and
plenty of them, -- that he is free to allow, -- to all others gifts
of nature or man, his eyes are sealed by the inexorable demand for
the precise conveniences to which he is accustomed in England.  Add
to this proud blindness the better quality of great downrightness in
speaking the truth, and the love of fair play, on all occasions, and,
moreover, the peculiarity which is alleged of the Englishman, that
his virtues do not come out until he quarrels.  Transfer these traits
to a very elegant and accomplished mind, and we shall have no bad
picture of Walter Savage Landor, who may stand as a favorable
impersonation of the genius of his countrymen at the present day.  A
sharp dogmatic man with a great deal of knowledge, a great deal of
worth, and a great deal of pride, with a profound contempt for all
that he does not understand, a master of all elegant learning and
capable of the utmost delicacy of sentiment, and yet prone to indulge
a sort of ostentation of coarse imagery and language.  His
partialities and dislikes are by no means calculable, but are often
whimsical and amusing; yet they are quite sincere, and, like those of
Johnson and Coleridge, are easily separable from the man.  What he
says of Wordsworth, is true of himself, that he delights to throw a
clod of dirt on the table, and cry, "Gentlemen, there is a better man
than all of you." Bolivar, Mina, and General Jackson will never be
greater soldiers than Napoleon and Alexander, let Mr. Landor think as
he will; nor will he persuade us to burn Plato and Xenophon, out of
our admiration of Bishop Patrick, or "Lucas on Happiness," or "Lucas
on Holiness," or even Barrow's Sermons.  Yet a man may love a
paradox, without losing either his wit or his honesty.  A less
pardonable eccentricity is the cold and gratuitous obtrusion of
licentious images, not so much the suggestion of merriment as of
bitterness.  Montaigne assigns as a reason for his license of speech,
that he is tired of seeing his Essays on the work-tables of ladies,
and he is determined they shall for the future put them out of sight.
In Mr. Landor's coarseness there is a certain air of defiance; and
the rude word seems sometimes to arise from a disgust at niceness and
over-refinement.  Before a well-dressed company he plunges his
fingers in a sess-pool, as if to expose the whiteness of his hands
and the jewels of his ring.  Afterward, he washes them in water, he
washes them in wine; but you are never secure from his freaks.  A
sort of Earl Peterborough in literature, his eccentricity is too
decided not to have diminished his greatness.  He has capital enough
to have furnished the brain of fifty stock authors, yet has written
no good book.

        But we have spoken all our discontent.  Possibly his writings
are open to harsher censure; but we love the man from sympathy, as
well as for reasons to be assigned; and have no wish, if we were
able, to put an argument in the mouth of his critics.  Now for twenty
years we have still found the "Imaginary Conversations" a sure
resource in solitude, and it seems to us as original in its form as
in its matter.  Nay, when we remember his rich and ample page,
wherein we are always sure to find free and sustained thought, a keen
and precise understanding, an affluent and ready memory familiar with
all chosen books, an industrious observation in every department of
life, an experience to which nothing has occurred in vain, honor for
every just and generous sentiment, and a scourge like that of the
Furies for every oppressor, whether public or private, we feel how
dignified is this perpetual Censor in his curule chair, and we wish
to thank a benefactor of the reading world.

        Mr. Landor is one of the foremost of that small class who make
good in the nineteenth-century the claims of pure literature.  In
these busy days of avarice and ambition, when there is so little
disposition to profound thought, or to any but the most superficial
intellectual entertainments, a faithful scholar receiving from past
ages the treasures of wit, and enlarging them by his own love, is a
friend and consoler of mankind.  When we pronounce the names of Homer
and Aeschylus, -- Horace, Ovid, and Plutarch, -- Erasmus, Scaliger,
and Montaigne, -- Ben Jonson and Isaak Walton, -- Dryden and Pope, --
we pass at once out of trivial associations, and enter into a region
of the purest pleasure accessible to human nature.  We have quitted
all beneath the moon, and entered that crystal sphere in which
everything in the world of matter reappears, but transfigured and
immortal.  Literature is the effort of man to indemnify himself for
the wrongs of his condition.  The existence of the poorest
play-wright and the humblest scrivener is a good omen.  A charm
attaches to the most inferior names which have in any manner got
themselves enrolled in the registers of the House of Fame, even as
porters and grooms in the courts, to Creech and Fenton, Theobald and
Dennis, Aubrey and Spence.  From the moment of entering a library and
opening a desired book, we cease to be citizens, creditors, debtors,
housekeepers, and men of care and fear.  What boundless leisure! what
original jurisdiction! the old constellations have set, new and
brighter have arisen; an elysian light tinges all objects.

        "In the afternoon we came unto a land
        In which it seemed always afternoon."

        And this sweet asylum of an intellectual life must appear to
have the sanction of nature, as long as so many men are born with so
decided an aptitude for reading and writing.  Let us thankfully allow
every faculty and art which opens new scope to a life so confined as
ours.  There are vast spaces in a thought; a slave, to whom the
religious sentiment is opened, has a freedom which makes his master's
freedom a slavery.  Let us not be so illiberal with our schemes for
the renovation of society and nature, as to disesteem or deny the
literary spirit.  Certainly there are heights in nature which command
this; there are many more which this commands.  It is vain to call it
a luxury, and as saints and reformers are apt to do, decry it as a
species of day-dreaming.  What else are sanctities, and reforms, and
all other things?  Whatever can make for itself an element, means,
organs, servants, and the most profound and permanent existence in
the hearts and heads of millions of men, must have a reason for its
being.  Its excellency is reason and vindication enough.  If rhyme
rejoices us, there should be rhyme, as much as if fire cheers us, we
should bring wood and coals.  Each kind of excellence takes place for
its hour, and excludes everything else.  Do not brag of your actions,
as if they were better than Homer's verses or Raphael's pictures.
Raphael and Homer feel that action is pitiful beside their
enchantments.  They could act too, if the stake was worthy of them;
but now all that is good in the universe urges them to their task.
Whoever writes for the love of truth and beauty, and not with
ulterior ends, belongs to this sacred class, and among these, few men
of the present age, have a better claim to be numbered than Mr.
Landor.  Wherever genius or taste has existed, wherever freedom and
justice are threatened, which he values as the element in which
genius may work, his interest is sure to be commanded.  His love of
beauty is passionate, and betrays itself in all petulant and
contemptuous expressions.

        But beyond his delight in genius, and his love of individual
and civil liberty, Mr. Landor has a perception that is much more
rare, the appreciation of character.  This is the more remarkable
considered with his intense nationality, to which we have already
alluded.  He is buttoned in English broadcloth to the chin.  He hates
the Austrians, the Italians, the French, the Scotch, and the Irish.
He has the common prejudices of the English landholder; values his
pedigree, his acres, and the syllables of his name; loves all his
advantages, is not insensible to the beauty of his watchseal, or the
Turk's head on his umbrella; yet with all this miscellaneous pride,
there is a noble nature within him, which instructs him that he is so
rich that he can well spare all his trappings, and, leaving to others
the painting of circumstance, aspire to the office of delineating
character.  He draws his own portrait in the costume of a village
schoolmaster, and a sailor, and serenely enjoys the victory of nature
over fortune.  Not only the elaborated story of Normanby, but the
whimsical selection of his heads prove this taste.  He draws with
evident pleasure the portrait of a man, who never said anything
right, and never did anything wrong.  But in the character of
Pericles, he has found full play for beauty and greatness of
behavior, where the circumstances are in harmony with the man.  These
portraits, though mere sketches, must be valued as attempts in the
very highest kind of narrative, which not only has very few examples
to exhibit of any success, but very few competitors in the attempt.
The word Character is in all mouths; it is a force which we all feel;
yet who has analyzed it?  What is the nature of that subtle, and
majestic principle which attaches us to a few persons, not so much by
personal as by the most spiritual ties?  What is the quality of the
persons who, without being public men, or literary men, or rich men,
or active men, or (in the popular sense) religious men, have a
certain salutary omnipresence in all our life's history, almost
giving their own quality to the atmosphere and the landscape?  A
moral force, yet wholly unmindful of creed and catechism,
intellectual, but scornful of books, it works directly and without
means, and though it may be resisted at any time, yet resistance to
it is a suicide.  For the person who stands in this lofty relation to
his fellow men is always the impersonation to them of their
conscience.  It is a sufficient proof of the extreme delicacy of this
element, evanescing before any but the most sympathetic vision, that
it has so seldom been employed in the drama and in novels.  Mr.
Landor, almost alone among living English writers, has indicated his
perception of it.

        These merits make Mr. Landor's position in the republic of
letters one of great mark and dignity.  He exercises with a grandeur
of spirit the office of writer, and carries it with an air of old and
unquestionable nobility.  We do not recollect an example of more
complete independence in literary history.  He has no clanship, no
friendships, that warp him.  He was one of the first to pronounce
Wordsworth the great poet of the age, yet he discriminates his faults
with the greater freedom.  He loves Pindar, Aeschylus, Euripides,
Aristophanes, Demosthenes, Virgil, yet with open eyes.  His position
is by no means the highest in literature; he is not a poet or a
philosopher.  He is a man full of thoughts, but not, like Coleridge,
a man of ideas.  Only from a mind conversant with the First
Philosophy can definitions be expected.  Coleridge has contributed
many valuable ones to modern literature.  Mr. Landor's definitions
are only enumerations of particulars; the generic law is not seized.
But as it is not from the highest Alps or Andes, but from less
elevated summits, that the most attractive landscape is commanded, so
is Mr. Landor the most useful and agreeable of critics.  He has
commented on a wide variety of writers, with a closeness and an
extent of view, which has enhanced the value of those authors to his
readers.  His Dialogue on the Epicurean philosophy is a theory of the
genius of Epicurus.  The Dialogue between Barrow and Newton is the
best of all criticisms on the Essays of Bacon.  His picture of
Demosthenes in three several Dialogues is new and adequate.  He has
illustrated the genius of Homer, Aeschylus, Pindar, Euripides,
Thucydides.  Then he has examined before he expatiated, and the
minuteness of his verbal criticism gives a confidence in his
fidelity, when he speaks the language of meditation or of passion.
His acquaintance with the English tongue is unsurpassed.  He "hates
false words, and seeks with care, difficulty, and moroseness, those
that fit the thing." He knows the value of his own words.  "They are
not," he says, "written on slate." He never stoops to explanation,
nor uses seven words where one will do.  He is a master of
condensation and suppression, and that in no vulgar way.  He knows
the wide difference between compression and an obscure elliptical
style.  The dense writer has yet ample room and choice of phrase, and
even a gamesome mood often between his valid words.  There is no
inadequacy or disagreeable contraction in his sentence, any more than
in a human face, where in a square space of a few inches is found
room for every possible variety of expression.

        Yet it is not as an artist, that Mr. Landor commends himself to
us.  He is not epic or dramatic, he has not the high, overpowering
method, by which the master gives unity and integrity to a work of
many parts.  He is too wilful, and never abandons himself to his
genius.  His books are a strange mixture of politics, etymology,
allegory, sentiment, and personal history, and what skill of
transition he may possess is superficial, not spiritual.  His merit
must rest at last, not on the spirit of the dialogue, or the symmetry
of any of his historical portraits, but on the value of his
sentences.  Many of these will secure their own immortality in
English literature; and this, rightly considered, is no mean merit.
These are not plants and animals, but the genetical atoms, of which
both are composed.  All our great debt to the oriental world is of
this kind, not utensils and statues of the precious metal, but
bullion and gold dust.  Of many of Mr. Landor's sentences we are fain
to remember what was said of those of Socrates, that they are cubes,
which will stand firm, place them how or where you will.

        We will enrich our pages with a few paragraphs, which we
hastily select from such of Mr. Landor's volumes as lie on our table.

                           ___________

        "The great man is he who hath nothing to fear and nothing to
hope from another.  It is he, who while he demonstrates the iniquity
of the laws, and is able to correct them, obeys them peaceably.  It
is he who looks on the ambitious, both as weak and fraudulent.  It is
he who hath no disposition or occasion for any kind of deceit, no
reason for being or for appearing different from what he is.  It is
he who can call together the most select company when it pleases him.
.. . . . . . . . .  Him I would call the powerful man who controls the
storms of his mind, and turns to good account the worst accidents of
his fortune.  The great man, I was going on to show thee, is somewhat
more.  He must be able to do this, and he must have that intellect
which puts into motion the intellect of others."

        "All titulars else must be produced by others; a knight by a
knight, a peer by a King, while a gentleman is self-existent."

        "Critics talk most about the _visible_ in sublimity . . the
Jupiter, the Neptune.  Magnitude and power are sublime, but in the
second degree, managed as they may be.  Where the heart is not
shaken, the gods thunder and stride in vain.  True sublimity is the
perfection of the pathetic, which has other sources than pity;
generosity, for instance, and self-devotion.  When the generous and
self-devoted man suffers, there comes Pity; the basis of the sublime
is then above the water, and the poet, with or without the gods, can
elevate it above the skies.  Terror is but the relic of a childish
feeling; pity is not given to children.  So said he; I know not
whether rightly, for the wisest differ on poetry, the knowledge of
which, like other most important truths, seems to be reserved for a
purer state of sensation and existence."

        "O Cyrus, I have observed that the authors of good make men
very bad as often as they talk much about them."

        "The habit of haranguing is in itself pernicious; I have known
even the conscientious and pious, the humane and liberal dried up by
it into egoism and vanity, and have watched the mind, growing black
and rancid in its own smoke."

        GLORY.
        "Glory is a light which shines from us on others, not from
others on us."

        "If thou lovest Glory, thou must trust her truth.  She
followeth him who doth not turn and gaze after her."

        RICHARD I.
        "Let me now tell my story . . to confession another time.  I
sailed along the realms of my family; on the right was England, on
the left was France; little else could I discover than sterile
eminences and extensive shoals.  They fled behind me; so pass away
generations; so shift, and sink, and die away affections.  In the
wide ocean I was little of a monarch; old men guided me, boys
instructed me; these taught me the names of my towns and harbors,
those showed me the extent of my dominions; one cloud, that dissolved
in one hour, half covered them.

        "I debark in Sicily.  I place my hand upon the throne of
Tancred, and fix it.  I sail again, and within a day or two I behold,
as the sun is setting, the solitary majesty of Crete, mother of a
religion, it is said, that lived two thousand years.  Onward, and
many specks bubble up along the blue Aegean; islands, every one of
which, if the songs and stories of the pilots are true, is the
monument of a greater man than I am.  I leave them afar off .  . . .
and for whom?  O, abbot, to join creatures of less import than the
sea-mews on their cliffs; men praying to be heard, and fearing to be
understood, ambitious of another's power in the midst of penitence,
avaricious of another's wealth under vows of poverty, and jealous of
another's glory in the service of their God.  Is this Christianity?
and is Saladin to be damned if he despises it?"

        DEMOSTHENES.
        "While I remember what I have been, I never can be less.
External power can affect those only who have none intrinsically.  I
have seen the day, Eubulides, when the most august of cities had but
one voice within her walls; and when the stranger, on entering them,
stopped at the silence of the gateway, and said, `Demosthenes is
speaking in the assembly of the people.'"

        "There are few who form their opinions of greatness from the
individual.  Ovid says, `the girl is the least part of herself.' Of
himself, certainly, the man is."

        "No men are so facetious as those whose minds are somewhat
perverted.  Truth enjoys good air and clear light, but no
playground."

        "I found that the principal means (of gratifying the universal
desire of happiness) lay in the avoidance of those very things, which
had hitherto been taken up as the instruments of enjoyment and
content; such as military commands, political offices, clients,
adventures in commerce, and extensive landed property."

        "Abstinence from low pleasures is the only means of meriting or
of obtaining the higher."

        "Praise keeps good men good."

 
        "The highest price we can pay for a thing is to ask for it."

        "There is a gloom in deep love as in deep water; there is a
silence in it which suspends the foot; and the folded arms, and the
dejected head are the images it reflects.  No voice shakes its
surface; the Muses themselves approach it with a tardy and a timid
step, and with a low and tremulous and melancholy song."

        "Anaxagoras is the true, firm, constant friend of Pericles; the
golden lamp that shines perpetually on the image I adore."

        [The Letter of Pericles to Aspasia in reply to her request to
be permitted to visit Xeniades.]

        "Do what your heart tells you; yes, Aspasia, do _all_ it tells
you.  Remember how august it is.  It contains the temple, not only of
Love, but of Conscience; and a whisper is heard from the extremity of
one to the extremity of the other.

        "Bend in pensiveness, even in sorrow, on the flowery bank of
youth, whereunder runs the stream that passes irreversibly! let the
garland drop into it, let the hand be refreshed by it -- but -- may
the beautiful feet of Aspasia stand firm."
                                                         E.

 
 
 
        _The Senses and the Soul_

        What we know is a point to what we do not know." The first
questions are still to be asked.  Let any man bestow a thought on
himself, how he came hither, and whither he tends, and he will find
that all the literature, all the philosophy that is on record, have
done little to dull the edge of inquiry.  The globe that swims so
silently with us through the sea of space, has never a port, but with
its little convoy of friendly orbs pursues its voyage through the
signs of heaven, to renew its navigation again forever.  The
wonderful tidings our glasses and calendars give us concerning the
hospitable lights that hang around us in the deep, do not appease but
inflame our curiosity; and in like manner, our culture does not lead
to any goal, but its richest results of thought and action are only
new preparation.

        Here on the surface of our swimming earth we come out of
silence into society already formed, into language, customs, and
traditions, ready made, and the multitude of our associates
discountenance us from expressing any surprise at the somewhat
agreeable novelty of Being, and frown down any intimation on our part
of a disposition to assume our own vows, to preserve our
independence, and to institute any inquiry into the sweet and sublime
vision which surrounds us.

        And yet there seems no need that any should fear we should grow
too wise.  The path of truth has obstacles enough of its own.  We
dwell on the surface of nature.  We dwell amidst surfaces; and
surface laps so closely on surface, that we cannot easily pierce to
see the interior organism.  Then the subtlety of things!  Under every
cause, another cause.  Truth soars too high or dives too deep, for
the most resolute inquirer.  See of how much we know nothing.  See
the strange position of man.  Our science neither comprehends him as
a whole, nor any one of its particulars.  See the action and reaction
of Will and Necessity.  See his passions, and their origin in the
deeps of nature and circumstance.  See the Fear that rides even the
brave.  See the omnipresent Hope, whose fountains in our
consciousness no metaphysician can find.  Consider the phenomenon of
Laughter, and explore the elements of the Comic.  What do we know of
the mystery of Music? and what of Form? why this stroke, this outline
should express beauty, and that other not?  See the occult region of
Demonology, with coincidence, foresight, dreams, and omens.  Consider
the appearance of Death, the formidable secret of our destiny,
looming up as the barrier of nature.

        Our ignorance is great enough, and yet the fact most surprising
is not our ignorance, but the aversation of men from knowledge.  That
which, one would say, would unite all minds and join all hands, the
ambition to push as far as fate would permit, the planted garden of
man on every hand into the kingdom of Night, really fires the heart
of few and solitary men.  Tell men to study themselves, and for the
most part, they find nothing less interesting.  Whilst we walk
environed before and behind with Will, Fate, Hope, Fear, Love, and
Death, these phantoms or angels, whom we catch at but cannot embrace,
it is droll to see the contentment and incuriosity of man.  All take
for granted, -- the learned as well as the unlearned, -- that a great
deal, nay, almost all, is known and forever settled.  But in truth
all is now to be begun, and every new mind ought to take the attitude
of Columbus, launch out from the gaping loiterers on the shore, and
sail west for a new world.

        This profound ignorance, this deep sleep of the higher
faculties of man, coexists with a great abundance of what are called
the means of learning, great activity of book-making, and of formal
teaching.  Go into one of our public libraries, when a new box of
books and journals has arrived with the usual importation of the
periodical literature of England.  The best names of Britain are on
the covers.  What a mass of literary production for a single week or
month!  We speculate upon it before we read.  We say, what an
invention is the press and the journal, by which a hundred pale
students, each a hive of distilled flowers of learning, of thought,
-- each a poet, -- each an accomplished man whom the selectest
influences have joined to breed and enrich, are made to unite their
manifold streams for the information and delight of everybody who can
read!  How lame is speech, how imperfect the communication of the
ancient Harper, wandering from castle to hamlet, to sing to a vagrant
audience his melodious thoughts!  These unopened books contain the
chosen verses of a hundred minstrels, born, living, and singing in
distant countries and different languages; for, the intellectual
wealth of the world, like its commercial, rolls to London, and
through that great heart is hurled again to the extremities.  And
here, too, is the result, not poetic, of how much thought, how much
experience, and how much suffering of wise and cultivated men!  How
can we in America expect books of our own, whilst this bale of wisdom
arrives once or twice in a month at our ports?

        In this mind we open the books, and begin to read.  We find
they are books about books; and then perhaps the book criticized was
itself a compilation or digest of others; so that the page we read is
at third or fourth hand from the event or sentiment which it
describes.  Then we find that much the largest proportion of the
pages relates exclusively to matter of fact -- to the superficial
fact, and, as if systematically, shuns any reference to a thought or
law which the fact indicated.  A large part again, both of the prose
and verse, is gleanings from old compositions, and the oft repeated
praise of such is repeated in the phrase of the present day.  We have
even the mortification to find one more deduction still from our
anticipated prize, namely, that a large portion of ostentatious
criticism is merely a hired advertisement of the great booksellers.
In the course of our turning of leaves, we fall at last on an
extraordinary passage -- a record of thought and virtue, or a clarion
strain of poetry, or perchance a traveller makes us acquainted with
strange modes of life and some relic of primeval religion, or, rarer
yet, a profound sentence is here printed -- shines here new but
eternal on these linen pages, -- we wonder whence it came, -- or
perhaps trace it instantly home -- _aut Erasmus aut Diabolus_ -- to
the only head it could come from.

        A few thoughts are all we glean from the best inspection of the
paper pile; all the rest is combination and confectionary.  A little
part abides in our memory, and goes to exalt the sense of duty, and
make us happier.  For the rest, our heated expectation is chilled and
disappointed.  Some indirect benefit will no doubt accrue.  If we
read with braced and active mind, we learn this negative fact, itself
a piece of human life.  We contrast this mountain of dross with the
grains of gold, -- we oversee the writer, and learn somewhat of the
laws of writing.  But a lesson as good we might be learning
elsewhere.

        Now what is true of a month's or a year's issue of new books,
seems to me with a little qualification true of the age.  The
_stock-writers_, (for the honesty of the literary class has given
this population a name,) vastly out-number the thinking men.  One
man, two men, -- possibly, three or four, -- have cast behind them
the long-descended costume of the academy, and the expectations of
fashion, and have said, This world is too fair, this world comes home
too near to me than that I should walk a stranger in it, and live at
second-hand, fed by other men's doctrines, or treading only in their
steps; I feel a higher right herein, and will hearken to the Oracle
myself.  Such have perceived the extreme poverty of literature, have
seen that there was not and could not be help for the fervent soul,
except through its own energy.  But the great number of those who
have voluminously ministered to the popular tastes were men of
talents, who had some feat which each could do with words, but who
have not added to wisdom or to virtue.  Talent amuses; Wisdom
instructs.  Talent shows me what another man can do; Genius acquaints
me with the spacious circuits of the common nature.  One is
carpentry; the other is growth.  To make a step into the world of
thought is now given to but few men; to make a second step beyond the
first, only one in a country can do; but to carry the thought on to
three steps, marks a great teacher.  Aladdin's palace with its one
unfinished window, which all the gems in the royal treasury cannot
finish in the style of the meanest of the profusion of jewelled
windows that were built by the Genie in a night, is but too true an
image of the efforts of talent to add one verse to the copious text
which inspiration writes by one or another scribe from age to age.

        It is not that the literary class or those for whom they write,
are not lovers of truth, and amenable to principles.  All are so.
The hunger of men for truth is immense; but they are not erect on
their feet; the senses are too strong for the soul.  Our senses
barbarize us.  When the ideal world recedes before the senses, we are
on a retrograde march.  The savage surrenders to his senses; he is
subject to paroxysms of joy and fear; he is lewd, and a drunkard.
The Esquimaux in the exhilaration of the morning sun, when he is
invigorated by sleep, will sell his bed.  He is the fool of the
moment's sensations to the degree of losing sight of the whole amount
of his sensations in so many years.  And there is an Esquimaux in
every man which makes us believe in the permanence of this moment's
state of our game more than our own experience will warrant.  In the
fine day we despise the house.  At sea, the passengers always judge
from the weather of the present moment of the probable length of the
voyage.  In a fresh breeze, they are sure of a good run; becalmed,
they are equally sure of a long passage.  In trade, the momentary
state of the markets betrays continually the experienced and
long-sighted.  In politics, and in our opinion of the prospects of
society, we are in like manner the slaves of the hour.  Meet one or
two malignant declaimers, and we are weary of life, and distrust the
permanence of good institutions.  A single man in a ragged coat at an
election looks revolutionary.  But ride in a stage-coach with one or
two benevolent persons in good spirits, and the Republic seems to us
safe.

        It is but an extension of the despotism of sense, -- shall I
say, only a calculated sensuality, -- a little more comprehensive
devotion which subjugates the eminent and the reputed wise, and
hinders an ideal culture.  In the great stakes which the leaders of
society esteem not at all fanciful but solid, in the best reputed
professions and operations, what is there which will bear the
scrutiny of reason?  The most active lives have so much routine as to
preclude progress almost equally with the most inactive.  We defer to
the noted merchants whose influence is felt not only in their native
cities, but in most parts of the globe; but our respect does them and
ourselves great injustice, for their trade is without system, their
affairs unfold themselves after no law of the mind; but are bubble
built on bubble without end; a work of arithmetic, not of commerce,
much less of considerate humanity.  They add voyage to voyage, and
buy stocks that they may buy stocks, and no ulterior purpose is
thought of.  When you see their dexterity in particulars, you cannot
overestimate the resources of good sense, and when you find how empty
they are of all remote aims, you cannot underestimate their
philosophy.

 
        The men of letters and the professions we have charged with the
like surrender to routine.  It is no otherwise with the men of
office.  Statesmen are solitary.  At no time do they form a class.
Governments, for the most part, are carried on by political merchants
quite without principle, and according to the maxims of trade and
huckster; so that what is true of merchants is true of public
officers.  Why should we suffer ourselves to be cheated by sounding
names and fair shows?  The titles, the property, the notoriety, the
brief consequence of our fellows are only the decoration of the
sacrifice, and add to the melancholy of the observer.

        "The earth goes on the earth glittering with gold,
        The earth goes to the earth sooner than it should,
        The earth builds on the earth castles and towers,
        The earth says to the earth, all this is ours."
 
        All this is covered up by the speedy succession of the
particulars, which tread so close on each other's heel, as to allow
no space for the man to question the whole thing.  There is somewhat
terrific in this mask of routine.  Captain Franklin, after six weeks
travelling on the ice to the North Pole, found himself two hundred
miles south of the spot he had set out from.  The ice had floated;
and we sometimes start to think we are spelling out the same
sentences, saying the same words, repeating the same acts as in
former years.  Our ice may float also.

        This preponderance of the senses can we balance and redress?
Can we give permanence to the lightnings of thought which lick up in
a moment these combustible mountains of sensation and custom, and
reveal the moral order after which the earth is to be rebuilt anew?
Grave questions truly, but such as to leave us no option.  To know
the facts is already a choosing of sides, ranges us on the party of
Light and Reason, sounds the signal for the strife, and prophesies an
end to the insanity and a restoration of the balance and rectitude of
man.

 
 

        _Transcendentalism_
 
        The more liberal thought of intelligent persons acquires a new
name in each period or community; and in ours, by no very good luck,
as it sometimes appears to us, has been designated as
Transcendentalism.  We have every day occasion to remark its perfect
identity, under whatever new phraseology or application to new facts,
with the liberal thought of all men of a religious and contemplative
habit in other times and countries.  We were lately so much struck
with two independent testimonies to this fact, proceeding from
persons, one in sympathy with the Quakers, and the other with the
Calvinistic Church, that we have begged the privilege to transcribe
an extract from two private letters, in order that we might bring
them together.

        The Calvinist writes to his Correspondent after this manner.

        "All the peculiarities of the theology, denominated
Trinitarian, are directly or indirectly transcendental.  The
sinfulness of man involves the supposition of a nature in man, which
transcends all limits of animal life and of social moralities.  The
reality of spirit, in the highest sense of that holy word, as the
essence of God and the inward ground and law of man's being and
doing, is supposed both in the fact of sin, and the possibility of
redemption of sin.  The mystery of the Father revealed only in the
Son as the Word of Life, the Light which illumines every man,
outwardly in the incarnation and offering for sin, inwardly as the
Christ in us, energetic and quickening in the inspirations of the
Holy Spirit, -- the great mystery wherein we find redemption, this,
like the rest, is transcendental.  So throughout, as might be shown
by the same induction suggested in relation to another aspect of the
matter.  Now here is my point.  Trinitarians, whose whole system from
beginning to end is transcendental, ideal, -- an idea is the highest
truth, -- war against the very foundations of whatever is
transcendental, ideal; all must be empiric, sensuous, inductive.  A
system, which used to create and sustain the most fervid enthusiasm,
as is its nature, for it makes God all in all, leads in crusade
against all even the purest and gentlest enthusiasm.  It fights for
the letter of Orthodoxy, for usage, for custom, for tradition,
against the Spirit as it breathes like healing air through the damps
and unwholesome swamps, or like strong wind throwing down rotten
trees and rotten frameworks of men.  It builds up with one hand the
Temple of Truth on the outside; and with the other works as in a
frenzy to tear up its very foundations.  So has it seemed to me.  The
transcendentalists do not err in excess but in defect, if I
understand the case.  They do not hold wild dreams for realities; the
vision is deeper, broader, more spiritual than they have seen.  They
do not believe with too strong faith; their faith is too dim of
sight, too feeble of grasp, too wanting in certainty.  I regret that
they should ever seem to undervalue the Scriptures.  For those
scriptures have flowed out of the same spirit which is in every pure
heart; and I would have the one spirit recognise and respond to
itself under all the multiform shapes of word, of deed, of faith, of
love, of thought, of affection, in which it is enrobed; just as that
spirit in us recognises and responds to itself now in the gloom of
winter, now in the cheer of summer, now in the bloom of spring, now
in the maturity of autumn; and in all the endless varieties of each."

        The Friend writes thus.
 
        "Hold fast, I beseech you, to the resolution to wait for light
from the Lord.  Go not to men for a creed, faint not, but be of good
courage.  The darkness is only for a season.  We must be willing to
tarry the Lord's time in the wilderness, if we would enter the
Promised Land.  The purest saints that I have ever known were long,
very long, in darkness and in doubt.  Even when they had firm faith,
they were long without _feeling_ what they _believed in_.  One told
me he was two years in chaotic darkness, without an inch of firm
ground to stand upon, watching for the dayspring from on high, and
after this long probation it shone upon his path, and he has walked
by its light for years.  Do not fear or regret your isolation from
men, your difference from all around you.  It is often necessary to
the enlargement of the soul that it should thus dwell alone for a
season, and when the mystical union of God and man shall be
completely developed, and you feel yourself newly born a child of
light, one of the sons of God, you will also feel new ties to your
fellow men; you will love them all in God, and each will be to you
whatever their state will permit them to be.

        "It is very interesting to me to see, as I do, all around me
here, the essential doctrines of the Quakers revived, modified,
stript of all that puritanism and sectarianism had heaped upon them,
and made the foundation of an intellectual philosophy, that is
illuminating the finest minds and reaches the wants of the least
cultivated.  The more I reflect upon the Quakers, the more I admire
the early ones, and am surprised at their being so far in advance of
their age, but they have educated the world till it is now able to go
beyond those teachers.

        "Spiritual growth, which they considered at variance with
intellectual culture, is now wedded to it, and man's whole nature is
advanced.  The intellectual had so lorded it over the moral, that
much onesided cultivation was requisite to make things even.  I
remember when your intellect was all in all, and the growth of the
moral sense came after.  It has now taken its proper place in your
mind, and the intellect appears for a time prostrate, but in due
season both will go on harmoniously, and you will be a perfect man.
If you suffer more than many before coming into the light, it is
because your character is deeper and your happy enlargement will be
proportioned to it."

        The identity, which the writer of this letter finds between the
speculative opinions of serious persons at the present moment, and
those entertained by the first Quakers, is indeed so striking as to
have drawn a very general attention of late years to the history of
that sect.  Of course, in proportion to the depth of the experience,
will be its independence on time and circumstances, yet one can
hardly read George Fox's Journal, or Sewel's History of the Quakers,
without many a rising of joyful surprise at the correspondence of
facts and expressions to states of thought and feeling, with which we
are very familiar.  The writer justly remarks the equal adaptation of
the philosophy in question "to the finest minds, and to the least
cultivated." And so we add in regard to these works, that quite apart
from the pleasure of reading modern history in old books, the reader
will find another reward in the abundant illustration they furnish to
the fact, that wherever the religious enthusiasm makes its
appearance, it supplies the place of poetry and philosophy and of
learned discipline, and inspires by itself the same vastness of
thinking; so that in learning the religious experiences of a strong
but untaught mind, you seem to have suggested in turn all the sects
of the philosophers.

        We seize the occasion to adorn our pages with the dying speech
of James Naylor, one of the companions of Fox, who had previously
been for eight years a common soldier in the army.  Its least service
will be to show how far the religious sentiment could exalt the
thinking and purify the language of the most uneducated men.

        "There is a spirit which I feel," said James Naylor a few hours
before his death, "that delights to do no evil, nor to revenge any
wrong, but delights to endure all things, in hope to enjoy its own in
the end.  Its hope is to outlive all wrath and contention, and to
weary out all exultation and cruelty, or whatever is of a nature
contrary to itself.  It sees to the end of all temptations.  As it
bears no evil in itself, so it conceives none in thought to any
other.  If it be betrayed, it bears it; for its ground and spring is
the mercies and forgiveness of God.  Its crown is meekness, its life
is everlasting love unfeigned, and it takes its kingdom with
entreaty, and keeps it by lowliness of mind.  In God alone it can
rejoice, though none else regard it, or can own its life.  It is
conceived in sorrow, and brought forth without any to pity it; nor
doth it murmur at grief and oppression.  It never rejoiceth but
through sufferings; for with the world's joy it is murdered.  I found
it alone being forsaken.  I have fellowship therein with them who
lived in dens and desolate places of the earth, who through death
obtained this resurrection and eternal holy life."

 
 
 
        _Prayers_
 
        Not with fond shekels of the tested gold,
        Nor gems whose rates are either rich or poor,
        As fancy values them: but with true prayers,
        That shall be up at heaven, and enter there
        Ere sunrise; prayers from preserved souls,
        From fasting maids, whose minds are dedicate
        To nothing temporal.
        SHAKSPEARE.

        Pythagoras said that the time when men are honestest, is when
they present themselves before the gods.  If we can overhear the
prayer, we shall know the man.  But prayers are not made to be
overheard, or to be printed, so that we seldom have the prayer
otherwise than it can be inferred from the man and his fortunes,
which are the answer to the prayer, and always accord with it.  Yet
there are scattered about in the earth a few records of these devout
hours which it would edify us to read, could they be collected in a
more catholic spirit than the wretched and repulsive volumes which
usurp that name.  Let us not have the prayers of one sect, nor of the
Christian Church, but of men in all ages and religions, who have
prayed well.  The prayer of Jesus is, as it deserves, become a form
for the human race.  Many men have contributed a single expression, a
single word to the language of devotion, which is immediately caught
and stereotyped in the prayers of their church and nation.  Among the
remains of Euripides, we have this prayer; "Thou God of all! infuse
light into the souls of men, whereby they may be enabled to know what
is the root from whence all their evils spring, and by what means
they may avoid them." In the Phaedrus of Plato, we find this petition
in the mouth of Socrates; "O gracious Pan! and ye other gods who
preside over this place! grant that I may be beautiful within; and
that those external things, which I have, may be such as may best
agree with a right internal disposition of mind; and that I may
account him to be rich, who is wise and just." Wacic the Caliph, who
died A. D. 845, ended his life, the Arabian historians tell us, with
these words; "O thou whose kingdom never passes away, pity one whose
dignity is so transient." But what led us to these remembrances was
the happy accident which in this undevoutage lately brought us
acquainted with two or three diaries which attest, if there be need
of attestation, the eternity of the sentiment and its equality to
itself through all the variety of expression.  The first is the
prayer of a deaf and dumb boy.

        "When my long-attached friend comes to me, I have pleasure to
converse with him, and I rejoice to pass my eyes over his
countenance; but soon I am weary of spending my time causelessly and
unimproved and I desire to leave him, (_but not in rudeness_,)
because I wish to be engaged in my business.  But thou, O my Father,
knowest I always delight to commune with thee in my lone and silent
heart; I am never full of thee; I am never weary of thee; I am always
desiring thee.  I hunger with strong hope and affection for thee, and
I thirst for thy grace and spirit.

        "When I go to visit my friends, I must put on my best garments,
and I must think of my manner to please them.  I am tired to stay
long, because my mind is not free, and they sometimes talk gossip
with me.  But, Oh my Father, thou visitest me in my work, and I can
lift up my desires to thee, and my heart is cheered and at rest with
thy presence, and I am always alone with thee, _and thou dost not
steal my time by foolishness_.  I always ask in my heart, where can I
find thee?"

        The next is a voice out of a solitude as strict and sacred as
that in which nature had isolated this eloquent mute.

        "My Father, when I cannot be cheerful or happy, I can be true
and obedient, and I will not forget that joy has been, and may still
be.  If there is no hour of solitude granted me, still I will commune
with thee.  If I may not search out and pierce my thought, so much
the more may my living praise thee.  At whatever price, I must be
alone with thee; this must be the demand I make.  These _duties_ are
not the life, but the means which enable us to show forth the life.
So must I take up this cross, and bear it willingly.  Why should I
feel reproved when a busy one enters the room?  I am not idle though
I sit with folded hands; but instantly I must seek some cover.  For
that shame I reprove myself.  Are they only the valuable members of
society who labor to dress and feed it?  Shall we never ask the aim
of all this hurry and foam, of this aimless activity?  Let the
purpose for which I live be always before me; let every thought and
word go to confirm and illuminate that end; namely, that I must
become near and dear to thee; that now I am beyond the reach of all
but thee.

        "How can we not be reconciled to thy will?  I will know the joy
of giving to my friend the dearest treasure I have.  I know that
sorrow comes not at once only.  We cannot meet it, and say, now it is
overcome, but again, and yet again its flood pours over us, and as
full as at first.

        "If but this tedious battle could be fought,
        Like Sparta's heroes at one rocky pass,
        `One day be spent in dying,' men had sought
        The spot and been cut down like mower's grass."

        The next is in a metrical form.  It is the aspiration of a
different mind, in quite other regions of power and duty, yet they
all accord at last.

        "Great God, I ask thee for no meaner pelf
        Than that I may not disappoint myself,
        That in my action I may soar as high,
        As I can now discern with this clear eye.
 
        And next in value, which they kindness lends,
        That I may greatly disappoint my friends,
        Howe'er they think or hope that it may be,
        They may not dream how thou 'st distinguished me.
 
        That my weak hand may equal my firm faith,
        And my life practise more than my tongue saith;
        That my low conduct may not show,
        Nor my relenting lines,
        That I thy purpose did not know,
        Or overrated thy designs."

 
        The last of the four orisons is written in a singularly calm
and healthful spirit, and contains this petition.

        "My Father!  I now come to thee with a desire to thank thee for
the continuance of our love, the one for the other.  I feel that
without thy love in me, I should be alone here in the flesh.  I
cannot express my gratitude for what thou hast been and continuest to
be to me.  But thou knowest what my feelings are.  When nought on
earth seemeth pleasant to me, thou dost make thyself known to me, and
teach me that which is needful for me, and dost cheer my travels on.
I know that thou hast not created me and placed me here on earth,
amidst its toils and troubles, and the follies of those around me,
and told me to be like thyself, when I see so little of thee here to
profit by; thou hast not done this, and then left me to myself, a
poor, weak man, scarcely able to earn my bread.  No; thou art my
Father, and I will love thee, for thou didst first love me, and
lovest me still.  We will ever be parent and child.  Wilt thou give
me strength to persevere in this great work of redemption.  Wilt thou
show me the true means of accomplishing it. . . . I thank thee for
the knowledge that I have attained of thee by thy sons who have been
before me, and especially for him who brought me so perfect a type of
thy goodness and love to men. . . . . I know that thou wilt deal with
me as I deserve.  I place myself therefore in thy hand, knowing that
thou wilt keep me from all harm so long as I consent to live under
thy protecting care."

        Let these few scattered leaves, which a chance, (as men say,
but which to us shall be holy,) brought under our eye nearly at the
same moment, stand as an example of innumerable similar expressions
which no mortal witness has reported, and be a sign of the times.
Might they be suggestion to many a heart of yet higher secret
experiences which are ineffable!  But we must not tie up the rosary
on which we have strung these few white beads, without adding a pearl
of great price from that book of prayer, the "Confessions of Saint
Augustine."

        "And being admonished to reflect upon myself, I entered into
the very inward parts of my soul, by thy conduct; and I was able to
do it, because now thou wert become my helper.  I entered and
discerned with the eye of my soul, (such as it was,) even beyond my
soul and mind itself the Light unchangeable.  Not this vulgar light
which all flesh may look upon, nor as it were a greater of the same
kind, as though the brightness of this should be manifold greater and
with its greatness take up all space.  Not such was this light, but
other, yea, far other from all these.  Neither was it so above my
understanding, as oil swims above water, or as the heaven is above
the earth.  But it is above me, because it made me; and I am under
it, because I was made by it.  He that knows truth or verity, knows
what that Light is, and he that knows it knows eternity, and it is
known by charity.  O eternal Verity! and true Charity! and dear
Eternity! thou art my God, to thee do I sigh day and night.  Thee
when I first knew, thou liftedst me up that I might see there was
what I might see, and that I was not yet such as to see.  And thou
didst beat back my weak sight upon myself, shooting out beams upon me
after a vehement manner, and I even trembled between love and horror,
and I found myself to be far off, and even in the very region of
dissimilitude from thee."

 
 
 
        _Fourierism and the Socialists_

        The increasing zeal and numbers of the disciples of Fourier, in
America and in Europe, entitle them to an attention which their
theory and practical projects will justify and reward.  In London, a
good weekly newspaper (lately changed into a monthly journal) called
"The Phalanx," devoted to the social doctrines of Charles Fourier and
bearing for its motto, "Association and Colonization," is edited by
Hugh Doherty.  Mr. Etzler's inventions, as described in the Phalanx,
promise to cultivate twenty thousand acres with the aid of four men
only and cheap machinery.  Thus the laborers are threatened with
starvation if they do not organize themselves into corporations, so
that machinery may labor _for_ instead of working _against_ them.  It
appears that Mr. Young, an Englishman of large property, has
purchased the Benedictine Abbey of Citeaux, in the Mont d'Or, in
France, with its ample domains, for the purpose of establishing a
colony there.  We also learn that some members of the sect have
bought an estate at Santa Catharina, fifty miles from Rio Janeiro, in
a good situation for an agricultural experiment, and one hundred
laborers have sailed from Havre to that port, and nineteen hundred
more are to follow.  On the anniversary of the birthday of Fourier,
which occurred in April, public festivals were kept by the Socialists
in London, in Paris, and in New York.  In the city of New York, the
disciples of Fourier have bought a column in the Daily Tribune,
Horace Greeley's excellent newspaper, whose daily and weekly
circulation exceeds twenty thousand copies, and through that organ
are now diffusing their opinions.

        We had lately an opportunity of learning something of these
Socialists and their theory from the indefatigable apostle of the
sect in New York, Albert Brisbane.  Mr. Brisbane pushes his doctrine
with all the force of memory, talent, honest faith, and importunacy.
As we listened to his exposition, it appeared to us the sublime of
mechanical philosophy; for the system was the perfection of
arrangement and contrivance.  The force of arrangement could no
farther go.  The merit of the plan was that it was a system; that it
had not the partiality and hint-and-fragment character of most
popular schemes, but was coherent and comprehensive of facts to a
wonderful degree.  It was not daunted by distance, or magnitude, or
remoteness of any sort, but strode about nature with a giant's step,
and skipped no fact, but wove its large Ptolemaic web of cycle and
epicycle, of phalanx and phalanstery, with laudable assiduity.
Mechanics were pushed so far as fairly to meet spiritualism.  One
could not but be struck with strange coincidences betwixt Fourier and
Swedenborg.  Genius hitherto has been shamefully misapplied, a mere
trifler.  It must now set itself to raise the social condition of
man, and to redress the disorders of the planet he inhabits.  The
Desert of Sahara, the Campagna di Roma, the frozen polar circles,
which by their pestilential or hot or cold airs poison the temperate
regions, accuse man.  Society, concert, cooperation, is the secret of
the coming Paradise.  By reason of the isolation of men at the
present day, all work is drudgery.  By concert, and the allowing each
laborer to choose his own work, it becomes pleasure.  "Attractive
Industry" would speedily subdue, by adventurous, scientific, and
persistent tillage, the pestilential tracts; would equalize
temperature; give health to the globe, and cause the earth to yield
`healthy imponderable fluids' to the solar system, as now it yields
noxious fluids.  The hyaena, the jackal, the gnat, the bug, the flea,
were all beneficent parts of the system; the good Fourier knew what
those creatures should have been, had not the mould slipped, through
the bad state of the atmosphere, caused, no doubt, by these same
vicious imponderable fluids.  All these shall be redressed by human
culture, and the useful goat, and dog, and innocent poetical moth, or
the wood-tick to consume decomposing wood, shall take their place.
It takes 1680 men to make one Man, complete in all the faculties;
that is, to be sure that you have got a good joiner, a good cook, a
barber, a poet, a judge, an umbrella-maker, a mayor and aldermen, and
so on.  Your community should consist of 2000 persons, to prevent
accidents of omission; and each community should take up 6000 acres
of land.  Now fancy the earth planted with fifties and hundreds of
these phalanxes side by side, -- what tillage, what architecture,
what refectories, what dormitories, what reading rooms, what
concerts, what lectures, what gardens, what baths!  What is not in
one, will be in another, and many will be within easy distance.  Then
know you and all, that Constantinople is the natural capital of the
globe.  There, in the Golden Horn, will be the Arch-Phalanx
established, there will the Omniarch reside.  Aladdin and his
magician, or the beautiful Scheherzarade, can alone in these prosaic
times, before the sight, describe the material splendors collected
there.  Poverty shall be abolished; deformity, stupidity, and crime
shall be no more.  Genius, grace, art, shall abound, and it is not to
be doubted but that, in the reign of "Attractive Industry," all men
will speak in blank verse.

        Certainly we listened with great pleasure to such gay and
magnificent pictures.  The ability and earnestness of the advocate
and his friends, the comprehensiveness of their theory, its apparent
directness of proceeding to the end they would secure, the
indignation they felt and uttered at all other speculation in the
presence of so much social misery, commanded our attention and
respect.  It contained so much truth, and promised in the attempts
that shall be made to realize it so much valuable instruction, that
we are engaged to observe every step of its progress.  Yet in spite
of the assurances of its friends, that it was new and widely
discriminated from all other plans for the regeneration of society,
we could not exempt it from the criticism which we apply to so many
projects for reform with which the brain of the age teems.  Our
feeling was, that Fourier had skipped no fact but one, namely, Life.
He treats man as a plastic thing, something that may be put up or
down, ripened or retarded, moulded, polished, made into solid, or
fluid, or gas, at the will of the leader; or, perhaps, as a
vegetable, from which, though now a poor crab, a very good peach can
by manure and exposure be in time produced, but skips the faculty of
life, which spawns and scorns system and system-makers, which eludes
all conditions, which makes or supplants a thousand phalanxes and
New-Harmonies with each pulsation.  There is an order in which in a
sound mind the faculties always appear, and which, according to the
strength of the individual, they seek to realize in the surrounding
world.  The value of Fourier's system is that it is a statement of
such an order externized, or carried outward into its correspondence
in facts.  The mistake is, that this particular order and series is
to be imposed by force of preaching and votes on all men, and carried
into rigid execution.  But what is true and good must not only be
begun by life, but must be conducted to its issues by life.  Could
not the conceiver of this design have also believed that a similar
model lay in every mind, and that the method of each associate might
be trusted, as well as that of his particular Committee and General
Office, No.  200 Broadway? nay, that it would be better to say, let
us be lovers and servants of that which is just; and straightway
every man becomes a centre of a holy and beneficent republic, which
he sees to include all men in its law, like that of Plato, and of
Christ.  Before such a man the whole world becomes Fourierized or
Christized or humanized, and in the obedience to his most private
being, he finds himself, according to his presentiment, though
against all sensuous probability, acting in strict concert with all
others who followed their private light.

        Yet in a day of small, sour, and fierce schemes, one is
admonished and cheered by a project of such friendly aims, and of
such bold and generous proportion; there is an intellectual courage
and strength in it, which is superior and commanding: it certifies
the presence of so much truth in the theory, and in so far is
destined to be fact.

        But now, whilst we write these sentences, comes to us a paper
from Mr. Brisbane himself.  We are glad of the opportunity of letting
him speak for himself.  He has much more to say than we have hinted,
and here has treated a general topic.  We have not room for quite all
the matter which he has sent us, but persuade ourselves that we have
retained every material statement, in spite of the omissions which we
find it necessary to make, to contract his paper to so much room as
we offered him.

        Mr. Brisbane, in a prefatory note to his article, announces
himself as an advocate of the Social Laws discovered by CHARLES
FOURIER, and intimates that he wishes to connect whatever value
attaches to any statement of his, with the work in which he is
exclusively engaged, that of Social Reform.  He adds the following
broad and generous declaration.

        "It seems to me that, with the spectacle of the present misery
and degradation of the human race before us, all scientific
researches and speculations, to be of any real value, should have a
bearing upon the means of their social elevation and happiness.  The
mass of scientific speculations, which are every day offered to the
world by men, who are not animated by a deep interest in the
elevation of their race, and who exercise their talents merely to
build up systems, or to satisfy a spirit of controversy, or personal
ambition, are perfectly valueless.  What is more futile than barren
philosophical speculation, that leads to no great practical results?"

 
 
 
        _Chardon Street and Bible Conventions_

        In the month of November, 1840, a Convention of Friends of
Universal Reform assembled in the Chardon Street Chapel, in Boston,
in obedience to a call in the newspapers signed by a few individuals,
inviting all persons to a public discussion of the institutions of
the Sabbath, the Church and the Ministry.  The Convention organized
itself by the choice of Edmund Quincy, as Moderator, spent three days
in the consideration of the Sabbath, and adjourned to a day in March,
of the following year, for the discussion of the second topic.  In
March, accordingly, a three-days' session was holden, in the same
place, on the subject of the Church, and a third meeting fixed for
the following November, which was accordingly holden, and the
Convention, debated, for three days again, the remaining subject of
the Priesthood.  This Convention never printed any report of its
deliberations, nor pretended to arrive at any _Result_, by the
expression of its sense in formal resolutions, -- the professed
object of those persons who felt the greatest interest in its
meetings being simply the elucidation of truth through free
discussion.  The daily newspapers reported, at the time, brief
sketches of the course of proceedings, and the remarks of the
principal speakers.  These meetings attracted a good deal of public
attention, and were spoken of in different circles in every note of
hope, of sympathy, of joy, of alarm, of abhorrence, and of merriment.
The composition of the assembly was rich and various.  The
singularity and latitude of the summons drew together, from all parts
of New England, and also from the Middle States, men of every shade
of opinion, from the straitest orthodoxy to the wildest heresy, and
many persons whose church was a church of one member only.  A great
variety of dialect and of costume was noticed; a great deal of
confusion, eccentricity, and freak appeared, as well as of zeal and
enthusiasm.  If the assembly was disorderly, it was picturesque.
Madmen, madwomen, men with beards, Dunkers, Muggletonians,
Come-outers, Groaners, Agrarians, Seventh-day-Baptists, Quakers,
Abolitionists, Calvinists, Unitarians, and Philosophers, -- all came
successively to the top, and seized their moment, if not their
_hour_, wherein to chide, or pray, or preach, or protest.  The faces
were a study.  The most daring innovators, and the
champions-until-death of the old cause, sat side by side.  The still
living merit of the oldest New England families, glowing yet, after
several generations, encountered the founders of families, fresh
merit, emerging, and expanding the brows to a new breadth, and
lighting a clownish face with sacred fire.  The assembly was
characterized by the predominance of a certain plain, sylvan strength
and earnestness, whilst many of the most intellectual and cultivated
persons attended its councils.  Dr. Channing, Edward Taylor, Bronson
Alcott, Mr. Garrison, Mr. May, Theodore Parker, H. C. Wright, Dr.
Osgood, William Adams, Edward Palmer, Jones Very, Maria W. Chapman,
and many other persons of a mystical, or sectarian, or philanthropic
renown, were present, and some of them participant.  And there was no
want of female speakers; Mrs. Little and Mrs. Lucy Sessions took a
pleasing and memorable part in the debate, and that flea of
Conventions, Mrs. Abigail Folsom, was but too ready with her
interminable scroll.  If there was not parliamentary order, there was
life, and the assurance of that constitutional love for religion and
religious liberty, which, in all periods, characterizes the
inhabitants of this part of America.

        There was a great deal of wearisome speaking in each of those
three days' sessions, but relieved by signal passages of pure
eloquence, by much vigor of thought, and especially by the exhibition
of character, and by the victories of character.  These men and women
were in search of something better and more satisfying than a vote or
a definition, and they found what they sought, or the pledge of it,
in the attitude taken by individuals of their number, of resistance
to the insane routine of parliamentary usage, in the lofty reliance
on principles, and the prophetic dignity and transfiguration which
accompanies, even amidst opposition and ridicule, a man whose mind is
made up to obey the great inward Commander, and who does not
anticipate his own action, but awaits confidently the new emergency
for the new counsel.  By no means the least value of this Convention,
in our eye, was the scope it gave to the genius of Mr. Alcott, and
not its least instructive lesson was the gradual but sure ascendency
of his spirit, in spite of the incredulity and derision with which he
is at first received, and in spite, we might add, of his own
failures.  Moreover, although no decision was had, and no action
taken on all the great points mooted in the discussion, yet the
Convention brought together many remarkable persons, face to face,
and gave occasion to memorable interviews and conversations, in the
hall, in the lobbies, or around the doors.

        Before this body broke up in November last, a short adjournment
was carried, for the purpose of appointing a Committee to summon a
new Convention, to be styled `the Bible Convention,' for the
discussion of the credibility and authority of the Scriptures of the
Old and New Testaments.  A Committee was agreed upon, and, by their
invitation, the new Association met in the Masonic Temple, in Boston,
on the 29th of March, of the present year.  This meeting was less
numerously attended, and did not exhibit at its birth the same vigor
as its predecessors.  Many persons who had been conspicuous in the
former meetings were either out of the country, or hindered from
early attendance.  Several who wished to be present at its
deliberations deferred their journey until the second day, believing
that, like the former Convention, it would sit three days.  Possibly
from the greater unpopularity of its object, out of doors, some
faintness or coldness surprised the members.  At all events, it was
hurried to a conclusion on the first day to the great disappointment
of many.  Mr. Brownson, Mr. Alcott, Mr. West, and among others a
Mormon preacher took part in the conversation.  But according to the
general testimony of those present, as far as we can collect it, the
best speech made on that occasion was that of Nathaniel H. Whiting,
of South Marshfield.  Mr. Whiting had already distinguished himself
in the Chardon Street meetings.  Himself a plain unlettered man,
leaving for the day a mechanical employment to address his fellows,
he possesses eminent gifts for success in assemblies so constituted.
He has fluency, self-command, an easy, natural method, and very
considerable power of statement.  No one had more entirely the ear of
this audience, for it is not to be forgotten that, though, as we have
said there were scholars and highly intellectual persons in this
company, the bulk of the assemblage was made up of quite other
materials, namely, of those whom religion and solitary thought have
educated, and not books or society, -- young farmers and mechanics
from the country, whose best training has been in the Anti-slavery,
and Temperance, and Non-resistance Clubs.

 
 
 
        _Agriculture of Massachusetts_

        In an afternoon in April, after a long walk, I traversed an
orchard where two boys were grafting apple trees, and found the
Farmer in his corn field.  He was holding the plough, and his son
driving the oxen.  This man always impresses me with respect, he is
so manly, so sweet-tempered, so faithful, so disdainful of all
appearances, excellent and reverable in his old weather-worn cap and
blue frock bedaubed with the soil of the field, so honest withal,
that he always needs to be watched lest he should cheat himself.  I
still remember with some shame, that in some dealing we had together
a long time ago, I found that he had been looking to my interest in
the affair, and I had been looking to my interest, and nobody had
looked to his part.  As I drew near this brave laborer in the midst
of his own acres, I could not help feeling for him the highest
respect.  Here is the Caesar, the Alexander of the soil, conquering
and to conquer, after how many and many a hard-fought summer's day
and winter's day, not like Napoleon hero of sixty battles only, but
of six thousand, and out of every one he has come victor; and here he
stands, with Atlantic strength and cheer, invincible still.  These
slight and useless city-limbs of ours will come to shame before this
strong soldier, for his have done their own work and ours too.  What
good this man has, or has had, he has earned.  No rich father or
father-in-law left him any inheritance of land or money.  He borrowed
the money with which he bought his farm, and has bred up a large
family, given them a good education, and improved his land in every
way year by year, and this without prejudice to himself the landlord,
for here he is, a man every inch of him, and reminds us of the hero
of the Robinhood ballad,

        "Much, the miller's son,
        There was no inch of his body
        But it was worth a groom."

        Innocence and justice have written their names on his brow.
Toil has not broken his spirit.  His laugh rings with the sweetness
and hilarity of a child; yet he is a man of a strongly intellectual
taste, of much reading, and of an erect good sense and independent
spirit which can neither brook usurpation nor falsehood in any shape.
I walked up and down, the field, as he ploughed his furrow, and we
talked as we walked.  Our conversation naturally turned on the season
and its new labors.  He had been reading the Report of the
Agricultural Survey of the Commonwealth, and had found good things in
it; but it was easy to see that he felt towards the author much as
soldiers do towards the historiographer who follows the camp, more
good nature than reverence for the gownsman.

        The First Report, he said, is better than the last, as I
observe the first sermon of a minister is often his best, for every
man has one thing which he specially wishes to say, and that comes
out at first.  But who is this book written for?  Not for farmers; no
pains are taken to send it to them; it was by accident that this copy
came into my hands for a few days.  And it is not for them.  They
could not afford to follow such advice as is given here; they have
sterner teachers; their own business teaches them better.  No; this
was written for the literary men.  But in that case, the State should
not be taxed to pay for it.  Let us see.  The account of the maple
sugar, -- that is very good and entertaining, and, I suppose, true.
The story of the farmer's daughter, whom education had spoiled for
everything useful on a farm, -- that is good too, and we have much
that is like it in Thomas's Almanack.  But why this recommendation of
stone houses?  They are not so cheap, not so dry, and not so fit for
us.  Our roads are always changing their direction, and after a man
has built at great cost a stone house, a new road is opened, and he
finds himself a mile or two from the highway.  Then our people are
not stationary, like those of old countries, but always alert to
better themselves, and will remove from town to town as a new market
opens, or a better farm is to be had, and do not wish to spend too
much on their buildings.

        The Commissioner advises the farmers to sell their cattle and
their hay in the fall, and buy again in the spring.  But we farmers
always know what our interest dictates, and do accordingly.  We have
no choice in this matter; our way is but too plain.  Down below,
where manure is cheap, and hay dear, they will sell their oxen in
November; but for me to sell my cattle and my produce in the fall,
would be to sell my farm, for I should have no manure to renew a crop
in the spring.  And thus Necessity farms it, necessity finds out when
to go to Brighton, and when to feed in the stall, better than Mr.
Colman can tell us.

        But especially observe what is said throughout these Reports of
the model farms and model farmers.  One would think that Mr. D. and
Major S. were the pillars of the Commonwealth.  The good Commissioner
takes off his hat when he approaches them, distrusts the value of
"his feeble praise," and repeats his compliments as often as their
names are introduced.  And yet, in my opinion, Mr. D. with all his
knowledge and present skill, would starve in two years on any one of
fifty poor farms in this neighborhood, on each of which now a farmer
manages to get a good living.  Mr. D. inherited a farm, and spends on
it every year from other resources; other-wise his farm had ruined
him long since; -- and as for the Major he never got rich by his
skill in making land produce, but by his skill in making men produce.
The truth is, a farm will not make an honest man rich in money.  I do
not know of a single instance, in which a man has honestly got rich
by farming alone.  It cannot be done.  The way in which men who have
farms grow rich, is either by other resources; or by trade; or by
getting their labor for nothing; or by other methods of which I could
tell you many sad anecdotes.  What does the Agricultural Surveyor
know of all this?  What can he know?  He is the victim of the
"Reports," that are sent him of particular farms.  He cannot go
behind the estimates to know how the contracts were made, and how the
sales were effected.  The true men of skill, the poor farmers who by
the sweat of their face, without an inheritance, and without offence
to their conscience, have reared a family of valuable citizens and
matrons to the state, reduced a stubborn soil to a good farm,
although their buildings are many of them shabby, are the only right
subjects of this Report; yet these make no figure in it.  These
should be holden up to imitation, and their methods detailed; yet
their houses are very uninviting and unconspicuous to State
Commissioners.  So with these premiums to Farms, and premiums to
Cattle Shows.  The class that I describe, must pay the premium which
is awarded to the rich.  Yet the premium obviously ought to be given
for the good management of a poor farm.

        In this strain the Farmer proceeded, adding many special
criticisms.  He had a good opinion of the Surveyor, and acquitted him
of any blame in the matter, but was incorrigible in his skepticism
concerning the benefits conferred by legislatures on the agriculture
of Massachusetts.  I believe that my friend is a little stiff and
inconvertible in his own opinions, and that there is another side to
be heard; but so much wisdom seemed to lie under his statement, that
it deserved a record.

 
 

 
        _The Zincali: or an Account of the Gypsies of Spain; with an
Original Collection of their Songs and Poetry_. By GEORGE BORROW.
        Two Volumes in one. New York: Wiley & Putnam.

        Our list of tribes in America indigenous and imported wants the
Gypsies, as the Flora of the western hemisphere wants the race of
heaths.  But as it is all one to the urchin of six years, whether the
fine toys are to be found in his father's house or across the road at
his grandfather's, so we have always domesticated the Gypsy in
school-boy literature from the English tales and traditions.  This
reprinted London book is equally sure of being read here as in
England, and is a most acceptable gift to the lovers of the wild and
wonderful.  There are twenty or thirty pages in it of fascinating
romantic attraction, and the whole book, though somewhat rudely and
miscellaneously put together, is animated, and tells us what we wish
to know.  Mr. Borrow visited the Gypsies in Spain and elsewhere, as
an agent of the British and Foreign Bible Society, and seems to have
been commended to this employment by the rare accomplishment of a
good acquaintance with the language of this singular people.  How he
acquired his knowledge of their speech, which seems to have opened
their hearts to him, he does not inform us; and he appears to have
prospered very indifferently in the religious objects of his mission;
but to have really had that in his nature or education which gave him
access to the gypsy gang, so that he has seen them, talked
confidentially with them, and brought away something distinct enough
from them.

        He has given us sketches of their past and present manner of
life and employments, in the different European states, collected a
strange little magazine of their poetry, and added a vocabulary of
their language.  He has interspersed some anecdotes of life and
manners, which are told with great spirit.

        This book is very entertaining, and yet, out of mere love and
respect to human nature, we must add that this account of the Gypsy
race must be imperfect and very partial, and that the author never
sees his object quite near enough.  For, on the whole, the impression
made by the book is dismal; the poverty, the employments,
conversations, mutual behavior of the Gypsies, are dismal; the poetry
is dismal.  Men do not love to be dismal, and always have their own
reliefs.  If we take Mr. Borrow's story as final, here is a great
people subsisting for centuries unmixed with the surrounding
population, like a bare and blasted heath in the midst of smiling
plenty, yet cherishing their wretchedness, by rigorous usage and
tradition, as if they loved it.  It is an aristocracy of rags, and
suffering, and vice, yet as exclusive as the patricians of wealth and
power.  We infer that the picture is false; that resources and
compensation exist, which are not shown us.  If Gypsies are pricked,
we believe they will bleed; if wretched, they will jump at the first
opportunity of bettering their condition.  What unmakes man is
essentially incredible.  The air may be loaded with fogs or with
fetid gases, and continue respirable; but if it be decomposed, it can
no longer sustain life.  The condition of the Gypsy may be bad
enough, tried by the scale of English comfort, and yet appear
tolerable and pleasant to the Gypsy, who finds attractions in his
out-door way of living, his freedom, and sociability, which the Agent
of the Bible Society does not reckon.  And we think that a traveler
of another way of thinking would not find the Gypsy so void of
conscience as Mr. Borrow paints him, as the differences in that
particular are universally exaggerated in daily conversation.  And
lastly, we suspect the walls of separation between the Gypsy and the
surrounding population are less firm than we are here given to
understand.

 
        _Ancient Spanish Ballads, Historical and Romantic. Translated,
        with Notes_. By J. G. LOCKHART. New York: Wiley & Putnam.

        The enterprising publishers, Messrs. Wiley & Putnam, who have
reprinted, in a plain but very neat form, Mr. Lockhart's gorgeously
illustrated work, have judiciously prefixed to it, by way of
introduction, a critique on the book from the Edinburgh Review, and
have added at the end of the volume an analytical account, with
specimens of the Romance of the Cid, from the Penny Magazine.  This
is done with the greatest propriety, for the Cid seems to be the
proper centre of Spanish legendary poetry.  The Iliad, the
Nibelungen, the Cid, the Robin Hood Ballads, Frithiof's Saga, (for
the last also depends for its merit on its fidelity to the legend,)
are five admirable collections of early popular poetry of so many
nations; and with whatever difference of form, they possess strong
mutual resemblances, chiefly apparent in the spirit which they
communicate to the reader, of health, vigor, cheerfulness, and good
hope.  In this day of reprinting and of restoration, we hope that
Southey's Chronicle of the Cid, which is a kind of "Harmony of the
Gospels" of the Spanish Romance, may be republished in a volume of
convenient size.  That is a strong book, and makes lovers and
admirers of "My Cid, the Perfect one, who was born in a fortunate
hour." Its traits of heroism and bursts of simple emotion, once read,
can never be forgotten; "I am not a man to be besieged;" and "God!
What a glad man was the Cid on that day," and many the like words
still ring in our ears.  The Cortes at Toledo, where judgment was
given between the Cid and his sons-in-law, is one of the strongest
dramatic scenes in literature.  Several of the best ballads in Mr.
Lockhart's collection recite incidents of the Cid's history.  The
best ballad in the book is the "Count Alarcos and the Infanta
Solisa," which is a meet companion for Chaucer's Griselda.  The
"Count Garci Perez de Vargas" is one of our favorites; and there is
one called the "Bridal of Andalla," which we have long lost all power
to read as a poem, since we have heard it sung by a voice so rich,
and sweet, and penetrating, as to make the ballad the inalienable
property of the singer.

 
        _Tecumseh; a Poem_. By GEORGE H. COLTON. New York: Wiley &
Putnam.

        This pleasing summer-day story is the work of a well read,
cultivated writer, with a skillful ear, and an evident admirer of
Scott and Campbell.  There is a metrical sweetness and calm
perception of beauty spread over the poem, which declare that the
poet enjoyed his own work; and the smoothness and literary finish of
the cantos seem to indicate more years than it appears our author has
numbered.  Yet the perusal suggested that the author had written this
poem in the feeling, that the delight he has experienced from Scott's
effective lists of names might be reproduced in America by the
enumeration of the sweet and sonorous Indian names of our waters.
The success is exactly correspondent.  The verses are tuneful, but
are secondary; and remind the ear so much of the model, as to show
that the noble aboriginal names were not suffered to make their own
measures in the poet's ear, but must modulate their wild beauty to a
foreign metre.  They deserved better at the author's hands.  We felt,
also, the objection that is apt to lie against poems on new subjects
by persons versed in old books, that the costume is exaggerated at
the expense of the man.  The most Indian thing about the Indian is
surely not his moccasins, or his calumet, his wampum, or his stone
hatchet, but traits of character and sagacity, skill or passion;
which would be intelligible at Paris or at Pekin, and which Scipio or
Sidney, Lord Clive or Colonel Crockett would be as likely to exhibit
as Osceola and Black Hawk.

 
 

        _Intelligence_

        Exploring Expedition.  The United States Corvette Vincennes,
Captain Charles Wilkes, the flag ship of the Exploring Expedition,
arrived at New York on Friday, June 10th, from a cruise of nearly
four years.  The Brigs Porpoise and Oregon may shortly be expected.
The Expedition has executed every part of the duties confided to it
by the Government.  A long list of ports, harbors, islands, reefs,
and shoals, named in the list, have been visited and examined or
surveyed.  The positions assigned on the charts to several vigias,
reefs, shoals, and islands, have been carefully looked for, run over,
and found to have no existence in or near the places assigned them.
Several of the principal groups and islands in the Pacific Ocean have
been visited, examined, and surveyed; and friendly intercourse, and
protective commercial regulations, established with the chiefs and
natives.  The discoveries in the Antarctic Ocean (Antarctic
continent, -- Observations for fixing the Southern Magnetic pole,
&c.) _preceded_ those of the French and English expeditions.  The
Expedition, during its absence, has also examined and surveyed a
large portion of the Oregon Territory, a part of Upper California,
including the Columbia and Sacramento Rivers, with their various
tributaries.  Several exploring parties from the Squadron have
explored, examined, and fixed those portions of the Oregon Territory
least known.  A map of the Territory, embracing its Rivers, Sounds,
Harbors, Coasts, Forts, &c., has been prepared, which will furnish
the information relative to our possessions on the Northwest Coast,
and the whole of Oregon.  Experiments have been made with the
pendulum, magnetic apparatus, and various other instruments, on all
occasions, -- the temperature of the ocean, at various depths
ascertained in the different seas traversed, and full meteorological
and other observations kept up during the cruise.  Charts of all the
surveys have been made, with views and sketches of headlands, towns
or villages, &c., with descriptions of all that appertains to the
localities, productions, language, customs, and manners.  At some of
the islands, this duty has been attended with much labor, exposure,
and risk of life, -- the treacherous character of the natives
rendering it absolutely necessary that the officers and men should be
armed, while on duty, and at all times prepared against their
murderous attacks.  On several occasions, boats have been absent from
the different vessels of the Squadron on surveying duty, (the greater
part of which has been performed in boats,) among islands, reefs,
&c., for a period of ten, twenty, and thirty days at one time.  On
one of these occasions, two of the officers were killed at the Fiji
group, while defending their boat's crew from an attack by the
Natives.

        _Harvard University_.

        On the subject of the University we cannot help wishing that a
change will one day be adopted which will put an end to the foolish
bickering between the government and the students, which almost every
year breaks out into those uncomfortable fracases which are called
`Rebellions.' Cambridge is so well endowed, and offers such large
means of education, that it can easily assume the position of an
University, and leave to the numerous younger Colleges the charge of
pupils too young to be trusted from home.  This is instantly effected
by the Faculty's confining itself to the office of Instruction, and
omitting to assume the office of Parietal Government.  Let the
College provide the best teachers in each department, and for a
stipulated price receive the pupil to its lecture-rooms and
libraries; but in the matter of morals and manners, leave the student
to his own conscience, and if he is a bad subject to the ordinary
police.  This course would have the effect of keeping back pupils
from College, a year or two, or, in some cases, of bringing the
parents or guardians of the pupil to reside in Cambridge; but it
would instantly destroy the root of endless grievances between the
student and teacher, put both parties on the best footing, --
indispensable one would say, to good teaching, -- and relieve the
professors of an odious guardianship, always degenerating into
espionage, which must naturally indispose men of genius and honorable
mind from accepting the professor's chair.

 
 
        _English Reformers_

        Whilst Mr. Sparks visits England to explore the manuscripts of
the Colonial Office, and Dr. Waagen on a mission of Art, Mr. Alcott,
whose genius and efforts in the great art of Education have been more
appreciated in England than in America, has now been spending some
months in that country, with the aim to confer with the most eminent
Educators and philanthropists, in the hope to exchange intelligence,
and import into this country whatever hints have been struck out
there, on the subject of literature and the First Philosophy.  The
design was worthy, and its first results have already reached us.
Mr. Alcott was received with great cordiality of joy and respect by
his friends in London, and presently found himself domesticated at an
institution, managed on his own methods and called after his name,
the School of Mr. Wright at Alcott House, Ham, Surrey.  He was
introduced to many men of literary and philanthropic distinction, and
his arrival was made the occasion of meetings for public conversation
on the great ethical questions of the day.

        Mr. Alcott's mission, beside making us acquainted with the
character and labors of some excellent persons, has loaded our table
with a pile of English books, pamphlets, periodicals, flying
prospectuses, and advertisements, proceeding from a class very little
known in this country, and on many accounts important, the party,
namely, who represent Social Reform.  Here are Educational Circulars,
and Communist Apostles; Alists; Plans for Syncretic Associations, and
Pestalozzian Societies, Self-supporting Institutions, Experimental
Normal Schools, Hydropathic and Philosophical Associations, Health
Unions and Phalansterian Gazettes, Paradises within the reach of all
men, Appeals of Man to Woman, and Necessities of Internal Marriage
illustrated by Phrenological Diagrams.  These papers have many sins
to answer for.  There is an abundance of superficialness, of
pedantry, of inflation, and of want of thought.  It seems as if these
sanguine schemers rushed to the press with every notion that danced
before their brain, and clothed it in the most clumsily compounded
and terminated words, for want of time to find the right one.  But
although these men sometimes use a swollen and vicious diction, yet
they write to ends which raise them out of the jurisdiction of
ordinary criticism.  They speak to the conscience, and have that
superiority over the crowd of their contemporaries, which belongs to
men who entertain a good hope.  Moreover, these pamphlets may well
engage the attention of the politician, as straws of no mean
significance to show the tendencies of the time.

        Mr. Alcott's visit has brought us nearer to a class of
Englishmen, with whom we had already some slight but friendly
correspondence, who possess points of so much attraction for us, that
we shall proceed to give a short account both of what we already
knew, and what we have lately learned, concerning them.  The central
figure in the group is a very remarkable person, who for many years,
though living in great retirement, has made himself felt by many of
the best and ablest men in England and in Europe, we mean James
Pierrepont Greaves, who died at Alcott-House in the month of March of
this year.  Mr. Greaves was formerly a wealthy merchant in the city
of London, but was deprived of his property by French spoliations in
Napoleon's time.  Quitting business, he travelled and resided for
some time in Germany.  His leisure was given to books of the deepest
character; and in Switzerland he found a brother in Pestalozzi.  With
him he remained ten years, living abstemiously, almost on biscuit and
water; and though they never learned each the other's language, their
daily intercourse appears to have been of the deepest and happiest
kind.  Mr. Greaves there made himself useful in a variety of ways.
Pestalozzi declared that Mr. Greaves understood his aim and methods
better than any other observer.  And he there became acquainted with
some eminent persons.  Mr. Greaves on his return to England
introduced as much as he could of the method and life, whose
beautiful and successful operations he had witnessed; and although
almost all that he did was misunderstood, or dragged downwards, he
has been a chief instrument in the regeneration in the British
schools.  For a single and unknown individual his influence has been
extensive.  He set on foot Infant Schools, and was for many years
Secretary to the Infant School Society, which office brought him in
contact with many parties, and he has connected himself with almost
every effort for human emancipation.  In this work he was engaged up
to the time of his death.  His long and active career developed his
own faculties and powers in a wonderful manner.  At his house, No. 49
Burton Street, London, he was surrounded by men of open and
accomplished minds, and his doors were thrown open weekly for
meetings for the discussion of universal subjects.  In the last years
he has resided at Cheltenham, and visited Stockport for the sake of
acquainting himself with the Socialists and their methods.

        His active and happy career continued nearly to the seventieth
year, with heart and head unimpaired and undaunted, his eyes and
other faculties sound, except his lower limbs, which suffered from
his sedentary occupation of writing.  For nearly thirty-six years he
abstained from all fermented drinks, and all animal food.  In the
last years he dieted almost wholly on fruit.  The private
correspondent, from whose account, written two years ago, we have
derived our sketch, proceeds in these words.  "Through evil reports,
revilings, seductions, and temptations many and severe, the Spirit
has not let him go, but has strongly and securely held him, in a
manner not often witnessed.  New consciousness opens to him every
day.  His literary abilities would not be by critics entitled to
praise, nor does he speak with what is called eloquence; but as he is
so much the `lived word,' I have described, there is found a potency
in all he writes and all he says, which belongs not to beings less
devoted to the Spirit.  Supplies of money have come to him as fast,
or nearly as fast as required, and at all events his serenity was
never disturbed on this account, unless when it has happened that,
having more than his expenses required, he has volunteered extraneous
expenditures.  He has been, I consider, a great apostle of the
Newness to many, even when neither he nor they knew very clearly what
was going forward.  Thus inwardly married, he has remained outwardly
a bachelor."

        Mr. Greaves is described to us by another correspondent as
being "the soul of his circle, a prophet of whom the world heard
nothing, but who has quickened much of the thought now current in the
most intellectual circles of the kingdom.  He was acquainted with
every man of deep character in England, and many both in Germany and
Switzerland; and Strauss, the author of the `Life of Christ,' was a
pupil of Mr. Greaves, when he held conversations in one of the
Colleges of Germany, after leaving Pestalozzi.  A most remarkable
man; nobody remained the same after leaving him.  He was the prophet
of the deepest affirmative truths, and no man ever sounded his
depths.  The best of the thought in the London Monthly Magazine was
the transcript of his Idea.  He read and wrote much, chiefly in the
manner of Coleridge, with pen in hand, in the form of notes on the
text of his author.  But, like Boehmen and Swedenborg, neither his
thoughts nor his writings were for the popular mind.  His favorites
were the chosen illuminated minds of all time, and with them he was
familiar.  His library is the most select and rare which I have seen,
including most of the books which we have sought with so ill success
on our side of the water." (* 1)

        (* 1) The following notice of Mr. Greaves occurs in Mr.
Morgan's "Hampden in the Nineteenth Century." "The gentleman whom he
met at the school was Mr. J. P. Greaves, at that time Honorary
Secretary to the Infant School Society, and a most active and
disinterested promoter of the system.  He had resided for three (?)
years with Pestalozzi, who set greater value upon right feelings and
rectitude of conduct, than upon the acquisition of languages.  A
collection of highly interesting letters, addressed to this gentleman
by Pestalozzi on the subject of education, has been published.  Among
the numerous advocates for various improvements, there was not one
who exceeded him in personal sacrifices to what he esteemed a duty.
At the same time he had some peculiar opinions, resembling the German
mystical and metaphysical speculations, hard to be understood, and to
which few in general are willing to listen, and still fewer to
subscribe; but his sincerity, and the kindness of his disposition
always secured for him a patient hearing." -- Vol. II. p.  22.

        His favorite dogma was the superiority of Being to all knowing
and doing.  Association on a high basis was his ideal for the present
conjuncture.  "I hear every one crying out for association," said he;
"I join in the cry; but then I say, associate first with the Spirit,
-- educate for this spirit-association, and far more will follow than
we have as yet any idea of.  Nothing good can be done without
association; but then we must associate with goodness; and this
goodness is the spirit-nature, without which all our societarian
efforts will be turned to corruption.  Education has hitherto been
all outward; it must now be inward.  The educator must keep in view
that which elevates man, and not the visible exterior world."  We
have the promise of some extracts from the writings of this great
man, which we hope shortly to offer to the readers of this Journal.
His friend, Mr. Lane, is engaged in arranging and editing his
manuscript remains.

        Mr. Heraud, a poet and journalist, chiefly known in this
country as the editor for two years of the (London) Monthly Magazine,
a disciple, in earlier years, of Coleridge, and by nature and taste
contemplative and inclined to a mystical philosophy, was a friend and
associate of Mr. Greaves; and for the last years has been more
conspicuous than any other writer in that connexion of opinion.  The
Monthly Magazine, during his editorship, really was conducted in a
bolder and more creative spirit than any other British Journal; and
though papers on the highest transcendental themes were found in odd
vicinity with the lowest class of flash and so-called comic tales,
yet a necessity, we suppose, of British taste made these strange
bed-fellows acquainted, and Mr. Heraud had done what he could.  His
papers called "Foreign Aids to Self Intelligence," were of signal
merit, especially the papers on Boehmen and Swedenborg.  The last is,
we think, the very first adequate attempt to do justice to this
mystic, by an analysis of his total works; and, though avowedly
imperfect, is, as far as it goes, a faithful piece of criticism.  We
hope that Mr. Heraud, who announces a work in three volumes, called
"Foreign Aids to Self Intelligence, designed for an Historical
Introduction to the Study of Ontological Science, preparatory to a
Critique of Pure Being," as now in preparation for the press, and of
which, we understand, the Essays in the Monthly Magazine were a part,
will be enabled to fulfil his design.  Mr. Heraud is described by his
friends as the most amiable of men, and a fluent and popular lecturer
on the affirmative philosophy.  He has recently intimated a wish to
cross the Atlantic, and read in Boston, a course of six lectures on
the subject of Christism as distinct from Christianity.

        One of the best contributors to Mr. Heraud's Magazine was Mr.
J. Westland Marston.  The papers marked with his initials are the
most eloquent in the book.  We have greatly regretted their
discontinuance, and have hailed him again in his new appearance as a
dramatic author.  Mr. Marston is a writer of singular purity of
taste, with a heart very open to the moral impulses, and in his
settled conviction, like all persons of a high poetic nature, the
friend of a universal reform, beginning in education.  His thought on
that subject is, that "it is only by teachers becoming men of genius,
that a nobler position can be secured to them." At the same time he
seems to share that disgust, which men of fine taste so quickly
entertain in regard to the language and methods of that class with
which their theory throws them into correspondence, and to be
continually attracted through his taste to the manners and persons of
the aristocracy, whose selfishness and frivolity displease and repel
him again.  Mr. Marston has lately written a Tragedy, called "The
Patrician's Daughter," which we have read with great pleasure,
barring always the fatal prescription, which in England seems to
mislead every fine poet to attempt the drama.  It must be the reading
of tragedies that fills them with this superstition for the buskin
and the pall, and not a sympathy with existing nature and the spirit
of the age.  The Patrician's Daughter is modern in its plot and
characters, perfectly simple in its style; the dialogue is full of
spirit, and the story extremely well told.  We confess, as we drew
out this bright pamphlet from amid the heap of crude declamation on
Marriage and Education, on Dietetics and Hydropathy, on Chartism and
Socialism, grim tracts on flesh-eating and dram-drinking, we felt the
glad refreshment of its sense and melody, and thanked the fine office
which speaks to the imagination, and paints with electric pencil a
new form,-- new forms on the lurid cloud.  Although the vengeance of
Mordaunt strikes us as overstrained, yet his character, and the
growth of his fortunes is very natural, and is familiar to English
experience in the Thurlows, Burkes, Foxes, and Cannings.  The Lady
Mabel is finely drawn.  Pity that the catastrophe should be wrought
by the deliberate lie of Lady Lydia; for beside that lovers, as they
of all men speak the most direct speech, easily pierce the cobwebs of
fraud, it is a weak way of making a play, to hinge the crisis on a
lie, instead of letting it grow, as in life, out of the faults and
conditions of the parties, as, for example, in Goethe's Tasso.  On
all accounts but one, namely, the lapse of five years between two
acts, the play seems to be eminently fit for representation.  Mr.
Marston is also the author of two tracts on Poetry and Poetic
Culture.

        Another member of this circle is Francis Barham, the dramatic
poet, author of "The Death of Socrates," a tragedy, and other pieces;
also a contributor to the Monthly Magazine.  To this gentleman we are
under special obligations, as he has sent us, with other pamphlets, a
manuscript paper "On American Literature," written with such flowing
good will, and with an aim so high, that we must submit some portion
of it to our readers.

        Intensely sympathizing, as I have ever done, with the great
community of truth-seekers, I glory in the rapid progress of that
Alistic, (* 2) or divine literature, which they develop and
cultivate.  To me this Alistic literature is so catholic and
universal, that it has spread its energies and influences through
every age and nation, in brighter or obscurer manifestations.  It
forms the intellectual patrimony of the universe, delivered down from
kindling sire to kindling son, through all nations, peoples, and
languages.  Like the God from whom it springs, on whom it lives, and
to whom it returns, this divine literature is ever young, ever old,
ever present, ever remote.  Like heaven's own sunshine, it adorns all
it touches, and it touches all.  It is a perfect cosmopolite in
essence and in action; it has nothing local or limitary in its
nature; it participates the character of the soul from which it
emanated.  It subsists whole in itself, it is its own place, its own
time, nor seeks abroad the life it grants at home; aye, it is an
eternal now, an eternal present, at once beginning, middle, and end
of every past and every future.

        (* 2) In explanation of this term, we quote a few sentences
from a printed prospectus issued by Mr. Barham. "_The Alist_; _a
Monthly Magazine of Divinity and Universal Literature_.  I have
adopted the title of `the Alist, or Divine,' for this periodical,
because the extension of Divinity and divine truth is its main
object.  It appears to me, that by a firm adherence to the {to
Theion}, or divine principle of things, a Magazine may assume a
specific character, far more elevated, catholic, and attractive, than
the majority of periodicals attain.  This Magazine is therefore
specially written for those persons who may, without impropriety, be
termed Alists, or Divines; those who endeavor to develop Divinity as
the grand primary essence of all existence, -- the element which
forms the all in all, -- the element in which we live, and move, and
have our being.  Such Alists, (deriving their name from Alah -- the
Hebrew title of God,) are Divines in the highest sense of the word;
for they cultivate Alism, or the Divinity of Divinities, as exhibited
in all Scripture and nature, and they extend religious and
philanthropical influences through all churches, states, and systems
of education.  This doctrine of Alism, or the life of God in the soul
of man, affords the only prothetic point of union, sufficiently
intense and authoritative to unite men in absolute catholicity.  In
proportion as they cultivate one and the same God in their minds,
will their minds necessarily unite and harmonize; but without this is
done, permanent harmony is impossible."

        It is, I conceive, salutary for us to take this enlarged view
of literature.  We should seek after literary perfection in this
cosmopolite spirit, and embrace it wherever we find it, as a divine
gift; for, in the words of Pope,

        "both precepts and example tell
        That nature's masterpiece is writing well."

        So was it with the august and prophetic Milton.  To him
literature was a universal presence.  He regarded it as the common
delight and glory of gods and men.  He felt that its _moral beauty_
lived and flourished in the large heart of humanity itself, and could
never be monopolized by times or places.  Most deeply do I think and
feel with Milton, when he utters the following words.  "What God may
have determined for me, I know not; but this I know, that if ever he
instilled an intense love of moral beauty into the breast of any man,
he has instilled it into mine.  Hence wherever I find a man despising
the false estimates of the vulgar, and daring to aspire in sentiment
and language and conduct to what the highest wisdom through every age
has taught us, as most excellent, to him I unite myself by a kind of
necessary attachment.  And if I am so influenced by nature, or
destiny, that by no exertions or labors of my own I may exalt myself
to this summit of worth and honor, yet no power in heaven or earth
will hinder me from looking with reverence and affection upon those,
who have thoroughly attained this glory, or appeared engaged in the
successful pursuit of it."

        Mr. Barham proceeds to apply this sentiment as analogous to his
own sentiment, in respect to the literatures of other nations, but
specially to that of America.
 
        The unity of language unites the literature of Britain and
America, in an essential and imperishable marriage, which no Atlantic
Ocean can divide.  Yes; I as an Englishman say this, and maintain it.
United in language, in literature, in interest, and in blood, I
regard the English in England and the English in America as one and
the same people, the same magnificent brotherhood.  The fact is owned
in the common names by which they are noted; John and Jonathan,
Angles and Yankees, all reecho the fact.

        Mr. Barham proceeds to exhibit the manifold reasons that enjoin
union on the two countries, deprecates the divisions that have
sometimes suspended the peace, and continues;

        Let us rather maintain the generous policy of Milton, and with
full acclamation of concord recite his inspiring words;

        "Go on both hand in hand, O nations, never to be disunited.  Be
the praise and the heroic song of all posterity.  Merit this, but
seek only virtue, not the extension of your limits.  For what needs
to win a fading triumphal laurel out of the tears of wretched men,
but to settle the true worship of God and justice in the
commonwealth.  Then shall the hardest difficulties smooth themselves
out before you, envy shall sink to hell, and craft and malice shall
be confounded, whether it be homebred mischief or outlandish cunning.
Yea, other nations will then covet to serve you; for lordship and
victory are but the pages of justice and virtue.  Commit securely to
true wisdom the vanquishing and uncaging of craft and subtlety, which
are but her two runagates.  Join your invincible might to do worthy
and godlike deeds, and then he that seeks to break your union, a
cleaving curse be his inheritance throughout all generations."

        Mr. Barham then proceeds to express his conviction, that the
specific character, which the literature of these countries should
aim at, is the Alistic or Divine.  It is only by an aim so high, that
an author can reach any excellence.

        "He builds too low who builds beneath the skies."
 
        But our limits forbid any more extracts from this friendly
manuscript at present.

        Another eminent member of this circle is Mr. Charles Lane, for
many years manager of the London Mercantile Price Current; a man of a
fine intellectual nature, inspired and hallowed by a profounder
faith.  Mr. Lane is the author of some pieces marked with his
initials, in the Monthly Magazine, and of some remarkable tracts.
Those which we have seen are, "The Old, the New-Old, and the New;"
"Tone in Speech;" some papers in a Journal of Health; and last and
best, a piece called "The Third Dispensation," prefixed by way of
preface to an English translation of Mme. Gatti de Gamond's
"Phalansterian," a French book of the Fourier School.  In this Essay
Mr. Lane considers that History has exhibited two dispensations,
namely, _first_, the Family Union, or connexion by tribes, which soon
appeared to be a disunion or a dispersive principle; _second_, the
National Union.  Both these, though better than the barbarism which
they displaced, are themselves barbarism, in contrast with the
_third_, or Universal Union.

        "As man is the uniter in all arrangements which stand _below_
him, and in which the objects could not unite themselves, so man
needs a uniter _above_ him, to whom he submits, in the certain
incapability of self-union.  This uniter, unity, or One, is the
premonitor whence exists the premonition Unity, which so recurrently
becomes conscious in man.  By a neglect of interior submission, man
fails of this antecedent, Unity; and as a consequence his attempts at
union by exterior mastery have no success." Certain conditions are
necessary to this, namely, the external arrangements indispensable
_for_ the evolution of the Uniting Spirit can alone be provided _by_
the Uniting Spirit.

        "We seem to be in an endless circle, of which both halves have
lost their centre connexion; for it is an operation no less difficult
than the junction of two such discs that is requisite to unity.
These segments also being in motion, each upon a false centre of its
own, the obstacles to union are incalculably multiplied.

        "The spiritual or theoretic world in man revolves upon one set
of principles, and the practical or actual world upon another.  In
ideality man recognizes the purest truths, the highest notions of
justice; in actuality he departs from all these, and his entire
career is confessedly a life of self-falseness and clever injustice.
This barren ideality, and this actuality replete with bitter fruits,
are the two hemispheres to be united for their mutual completion, and
their common central point is the reality antecedent to them both.
This point is not to be discovered by the rubbing of these two half
globes together, by their curved sides, nor even as a school boy
would attempt to unite his severed marble by the flat sides.  The
circle must be drawn anew from reality as a central point, the new
radius embracing equally the new ideality and the new actuality.

        "With this newness of love in men there would resplendently
shine forth in them a newness of light, and a newness of life,
charming the steadiest beholder."_--Introduction_, p. 4.

        The remedy, which Mr. Lane proposes for the existing evils, is
his "True Harmonic Association." But he more justly confides in
"ceasing from doing" than in exhausting efforts at inadequate
remedies.  "From medicine to medicine is a change from disease to
disease; and man must cease from self-activity, ere the spirit can
fill him with truth in mind or health in body.  The Civilization is
become intensely false, and thrusts the human being into false
predicaments.  The antagonism of business to all that is high and
good and generic is hourly declared by the successful, as well as by
the failing.  The mercantile system, based on individual
aggrandizement, draws men from unity; its swelling columns of figures
describe, in pounds, shillings, and pence, the degrees of man's
departure from love, from wisdom, from power.  The idle are as
unhappy as the busy.  Whether the dread factory-bell, or the
fox-hunter's horn calls to a pursuit more fatal to man's best
interests, is an inquiry which appears more likely to terminate in
the cessation of both, than in a preference of either."

        Mr. Lane does not confound society with sociableness.  "On the
contrary, it is when the sympathy with man is the stronger and the
truer, that the sympathy with men grows weaker, and the sympathy with
their actions weakest."

 
        We must content ourselves with these few sentences from Mr.
Lane's book, but we shall shortly hear from him again.  This is no
man of letters, but a man of ideas.  Deep opens below deep in his
thought, and for the solution of each new problem he recurs, with new
success, to the highest truth, to that which is most generous, most
simple, and most powerful; to that which cannot be comprehended, or
overseen, or exhausted.  His words come to us like the voices of home
out of a far country.

        With Mr. Lane is associated in the editorship of a monthly
tract, called "The Healthian," and in other kindred enterprises, Mr.
Henry G. Wright, who is the teacher of the School at Ham Common, near
Richmond, and the author of several tracts on moral and social
topics.

        This school is founded on a faith in the presence of the Divine
Spirit in man.  The teachers say, "that in their first experiments
they found they had to deal with a higher nature than the mere
mechanical.  They found themselves in contact with an essence
indefinably delicate.  The great difficulty with relation to the
children, with which they were first called to wrestle, was an
unwillingness to admit access to their spiritual natures.  The
teachers felt this keenly.  They sought for the cause.  They found it
in their own hearts.  Pure spirit would not, could not hold communion
with their corrupted modes.  These must be surrendered, and love
substituted in lieu of them.  The experience was soon made that the
primal duty of the educator is entire self-surrender to love.  Not
partial, not of the individual, but pure, unlimited, universal.  It
is impossible to speak to natures deeper than those from which you
speak.  Reason cries to Reason, Love to Love.  Hence the personal
elevation of the teacher is of supreme importance." Mr. Alcott, who
may easily be a little partial to an instructor who has adopted
cordially his own methods, writes thus of his friend.

        "Mr. Wright is a younger disciple of the same eternal verity,
which I have loved and served so long.  You have never seen his like,
so deep serene, so clear, so true, and so good.  His school is a most
refreshing and happy place.  The children are mostly under twelve
years of age, of both sexes; and his art and method of education
simple and natural.  It seemed like being again in my own school,
save that a wiser wisdom directs, and a lovelier love presides over
its order and teachings.  He is not yet thirty years of age, but he
has more genius for education than any man I have seen, and not of
children alone, but he possesses the rare art of teaching men and
women.  What I have dreamed and stammered, and preached, and prayed
about so long, is in him clear and definite.  It is life, influence,
reality.  I flatter myself that I shall bring him with me on my
return.  He cherishes hopes of making our land the place of his
experiment on human culture, and of proving to others the worth of
the divine idea that now fills and exalts him."

        In consequence of Mr. Greaves's persuasion, which seems to be
shared by his friends, that the special remedy for the evils of
society at the present moment is association; perhaps from a more
universal tendency, which has drawn in many of the best minds in this
country also to accuse the idealism, which contents itself with the
history of the private mind, and to demand of every thinker the
warmest dedication to the race, this class of which we speak are
obviously inclined to favor the plans of the Socialists.  They appear
to be in active literary and practical connexion with Mr. Doherty,
the intelligent and catholic editor of the London Phalanx, who is
described to us as having been a personal friend of Fourier, and
himself a man of sanguine temper, but a friend of temperate measures,
and willing to carry his points with wise moderation, on one side;
and in friendly relations with Robert Owen, "the philanthropist, `who
writes in brick and clay, in gardens and green fields,' who is a
believer in the comforts and humanities of life, and would give these
in abundance to all men," although they are widely distinguished from
this last in their devout spiritualism.  Many of the papers on our
table contain schemes and hints for a better social organization,
especially the plan of what they call "a Concordium, or a Primitive
Home, which is about to be commenced by united individuals, who are
desirous, under industrial and progressive education, with simplicity
in diet, dress, lodging, &c., to retain the means for the harmonic
development of their physical, intellectual, and moral natures."  The
institution is to be in the country, the inmates are to be of both
sexes, they are to labor on the land, their drink is to be water, and
their food chiefly uncooked by fire, and the habits of the members
throughout of the same simplicity.  Their unity is to be based on
their education in a religious love, which subordinates all persons,
and perpetually invokes the presence of the spirit in every
transaction.  It is through this tendency that these gentlemen have
been drawn into fellowship with a humbler, but far larger class of
their countrymen, of whom Goodwyn Barmby may stand for the
representative.

        Mr. Barmby is the editor of a penny magazine, called "The
Promethean, or Communitarian Apostle," published monthly, and, as the
covers inform us, "the cheapest of all magazines, and the paper the
most devoted of any to the cause of the people; consecrated to
Pantheism in Religion, and Communism in Politics." Mr. Barmby is a
sort of Camille Desmoulins of British Revolution, a radical poet,
with too little fear of grammar and rhetoric before his eyes, with as
little fear of the Church or the State, writing often with as much
fire, though not with as much correctness, as Ebenezer Elliott.  He
is the author of a poem called "The European Pariah," which will
compare favorably with the Corn-law Rhymes.  His paper is of great
interest, as it details the conventions, the counsels, the measures
of Barmby and his friends, for the organization of a new order of
things, totally at war with the establishment.  Its importance arises
from the fact, that it comes obviously from the heart of the people.
It is a cry of the miner and weaver for bread, for daylight, and
fresh air, for space to exist in, and time to catch their breath and
rest themselves in; a demand for political suffrage, and the power to
tax as a counterpart to the liability of being taxed; a demand for
leisure, for learning, for arts and sciences, for the higher social
enjoyments.  It is one of a cloud of pamphlets in the same temper and
from the same quarter, which show a wholly new state of feeling in
the body of the British people.  In a time of distress among the
manufacturing classes, severe beyond any precedent, when, according
to the statements vouched by Lord Brougham in the House of Peers, and
Mr. O'Connell and others in the Commons, wages are reduced in some of
the manufacturing villages to six pence a week, so that men are
forced to sustain themselves and their families at less than a penny
a day; when the most revolting expedients are resorted to for food;
when families attempt by a recumbent posture to diminish the pangs of
hunger; in the midst of this exasperation the voice of the people is
temperate and wise beyond all former example.  They are intent on
personal as well as on national reforms.  Jack Cade leaves behind him
his bludgeon and torch, and is grown amiable, literary,
philosophical, and mystical.  He reads Fourier, he reads Shelley, he
reads Milton.  He goes for temperance, for non-resistance, for
education, and for the love-marriage, with the two poets above named;
and for association, after the doctrines either of Owen or of
Fourier.  One of the most remarkable of the tracts before us is "A
Plan for the Education and Improvement of the People, addressed to
the Working Classes of the United Kingdom; written in Warwick Gaol,
by William Lovett, cabinet-maker, and John Collins, tool-maker,"
which is a calm, intelligent, and earnest plea for a new organization
of the people, for the highest social and personal benefits, urging
the claims of general education, of the Infant School, the Normal
School, and so forth; announcing rights, but with equal emphasis
admitting duties.  And Mr. Barmby, whilst he attacks with great
spirit and great contempt the conventions of society, is a worshipper
of love and of beauty, and vindicates the arts.  "The apostleship of
veritable doctrine," he says, "in the fine arts is a really religious
Apostolate, as the fine arts in their perfect manifestation tend to
make mankind virtuous and happy."

        It will give the reader some precise information of the views
of the most devout and intelligent persons in the company we have
described, if we add an account of a public conversation which
occurred during the last summer.  In the (London) Morning Chronicle,
of 5 July, we find the following advertisement.  "Public Invitation.
An open meeting of the friends to human progress will be held
to-morrow, July 6, at Mr. Wright's Alcott-House School, Ham Common,
near Richmond, Surrey, for the purpose of considering and adopting
means for the promotion of the great end, when all who are interested
in human destiny are earnestly urged to attend.  The chair taken at
Three o'clock and again at Seven, by A. Bronson Alcott, Esq., now on
a visit from America.  Omnibuses travel to and fro, and the Richmond
steam-boat reaches at a convenient hour."

        Of this conference a private correspondent has furnished us
with the following report.

        A very pleasant day to us was Wednesday, the sixth of July.  On
that day an open meeting was held at Mr. Wright's, Alcott-House
School, Ham, Surrey, to define the aims and initiate the means of
human culture.  There were some sixteen or twenty of us assembled on
the lawn at the back of the house.  We came from many places; one 150
miles; another a hundred; others from various distances; and our
brother Bronson Alcott from Concord, North America.  We found it not
easy to propose a question sufficiently comprehensive to unfold the
whole of the fact with which our bosoms labored.  We aimed at nothing
less than to speak of the instauration of Spirit and its incarnation
in a beautiful form.  We had no chairman, and needed none.  We came
not to dispute, but to hear and to speak.  And when a word failed in
extent of meaning, we loaded the word with new meaning.  The word did
not confine our experience, but from our own being we gave
significance to the word.  Into one body we infused many lives, and
it shone as the image of divine or angelic or human thought.  For a
word is a Proteus that means to a man what the man is.  Three papers
were successively presented.

        _Poems_. By ALFRED TENNYSON. Two Volumes. Boston: W. D.
Ticknor.

        Tennyson is more simply the songster than any poet of our time.
With him the delight of musical expression is first, the thought
second.  It was well observed by one of our companions, that he has
described just what we should suppose to be his method of composition
in this verse from "The Miller's Daughter."

                "A love-song I had somewhere read,
        An echo from a measured strain,
                Beat time to nothing in my head
        From some odd corner of the brain.
                It haunted me the morning long,
        With weary sameness in the rhymes,
                _The phantom of a silent song_,
        _That went and came a thousand times_."

        So large a proportion of even the good poetry of our time is
ever over-ethical or over-passionate, and the stock poetry is so
deeply tainted with a sentimental egotism, that this, whose chief
merits lay in its melody and picturesque power, was most refreshing.
What a relief, after sermonizing and wailing had dulled the sense
with such a weight of cold abstraction, to be soothed by this ivory
lute!

        Not that he wanted nobleness and individuality in his thoughts,
or a due sense of the poet's vocation; but he won us to truths, not
forced them upon us; as we listened, the cope

        "Of the self-attained futurity
        Was cloven with the million stars which tremble
        O'er the deep mind of dauntless infamy."
 
        And he seemed worthy thus to address his friend,
 
        "Weak truth a-leaning on her crutch,
        Wan, wasted truth in her utmost need,
        Thy kingly intellect shall feed,
        Until she be an athlete bold."

        Unless thus sustained, the luxurious sweetness of his verse
must have wearied.  Yet it was not of aim or meaning we thought most,
but of his exquisite sense for sounds and melodies, as marked by
himself in the description of Cleopatra.

        "Her warbling voice, a lyre of widest range,
        Touched by all passion, did fall down and glance
        From tone to tone, and glided through all change
        Of liveliest utterance."
 
        Or in the fine passage in the Vision of Sin, where
 
        "Then the music touched the gates and died;
        Rose again from where it seemed to fail,
        Stormed in orbs of song, a growing gale;" &c.
 
        Or where the Talking Oak composes its serenade for the pretty
Alice; but indeed his descriptions of melody are almost as abundant
as his melodies, though the central music of the poet's mind is, he
says, as that of the

        "fountain
        Like sheet lightning,
        Ever brightening
        With a low melodious thunder;
        All day and all night it is ever drawn
        From the brain of the purple mountain
        Which stands in the distance yonder:
        It springs on a level of bowery lawn,
        And the mountain draws it from heaven above,
        And it sings a song of undying love."

        Next to his music, his delicate, various, gorgeous music,
stands his power of picturesque representation.  And his, unlike
those of most poets, are eye-pictures, not mind-pictures.  And yet
there is no hard or tame fidelity, but a simplicity and ease at
representation (which is quite another thing from reproduction)
rarely to be paralleled.  How, in the Palace of Art, for instance,
they are unrolled slowly and gracefully, as if painted one after
another on the same canvass.  The touch is calm and masterly, though
the result is looked at with a sweet, self-pleasing eye.  Who can
forget such as this, and of such there are many, painted with as few
strokes and with as complete a success?

        "A still salt pool, locked in with bars of sand;
        Left on the shore; that hears all night
        The plunging seas draw backward from the land
        Their moon-led waters white."

        Tennyson delights in a garden.  Its groups, and walks, and
mingled bloom intoxicate him, and us through him.  So high is his
organization, and so powerfully stimulated by color and perfume, that
it heightens all our senses too, and the rose is glorious, not from
detecting its ideal beauty, but from a perfection of hue and scent,
we never felt before.  All the earlier poems are flower-like, and
this tendency is so strong in him, that a friend observed, he could
not keep up the character of the tree in his Oak of Summer Chase, but
made it talk like an "enormous flower." The song,

        "A spirit haunts the year's last hours,"
 
         is not to be surpassed for its picture of the autumnal
garden.

        The new poems, found in the present edition, show us our friend
of ten years since much altered, yet the same.  The light he sheds on
the world is mellowed and tempered.  If the charm he threw around us
before was somewhat too sensuous, it is not so now; he is deeply
thoughtful; the dignified and graceful man has displaced the Antinous
beauty of the youth.  His melody is less rich, less intoxicating, but
deeper; a sweetness from the soul, sweetness as of the hived honey of
fine experiences, replaces the sweetness which captivated the ear
only, in many of his earlier verses.  His range of subjects was great
before, and is now such that he would seem too merely the amateur,
but for the success in each, which says that the same fluent and
apprehensive nature, which threw itself with such ease into the forms
of outward beauty, has now been intent rather on the secrets of the
shaping spirit.  In `Locksley Hall,' `St. Simeon Stylites,'
`Ulysses,' `Love and Duty,' `The Two Voices,' are deep tones, that
bespeak that acquaintance with realities, of which, in the `Palace of
Art,' he had expressed his need.  The keen sense of outward beauty,
the ready shaping fancy, had not been suffered to degrade the poet
into that basest of beings, an intellectual voluptuary, and a pensive
but serene wisdom hallows all his song.

        His opinions on subjects, that now divide the world, are stated
in two or three of these pieces, with that temperance and candor of
thought, now more rare even than usual, and with a simplicity
bordering on homeliness of diction, which is peculiarly pleasing,
from the sense of plastic power and refined good sense it imparts.

        A gentle and gradual style of narration, without prolixity or
tameness, is seldom to be found in the degree in which such pieces as
`Dora' and `Godiva' display it.  The grace of the light ballad pieces
is as remarkable in its way, as was his grasp and force in `Oriana,'
`The Lord of Burleigh,' `Edward Gray,' and `Lady Clare,' are
distinguished for different shades of this light grace, tender, and
speaking more to the soul than the sense, like the different hues in
the landscape, when the sun is hid in clouds, so gently shaded that
they seem but the echoes of themselves.

        I know not whether most to admire the bursts of passion in
`Locksley Hall,' the playful sweetness of the `Talking Oak,' or the
mere catching of a cadence in such slight things as

        "Break, break, break
        On thy cold gray stones, O sea," &c.

        Nothing is more uncommon than the lightness of touch, which
gives a charm to such little pieces as the `Skipping Rope.'

        We regret much to miss from this edition `The Mystic,' `The
Deserted House,' and `Elegiacs,' all favorites for years past, and
not to be disparaged in favor of any in the present collection.
England, we believe, has not shown a due sense of the merits of this
poet, and to us is given the honor of rendering homage more readily
to an accurate and elegant intellect, a musical reception of nature,
a high tendency in thought, and a talent of singular fineness,
flexibility, and scope.

 
 

        _A Letter to Rev. Wm. E. Channing, D. D._ By O. A. BROWNSON
        Boston: Charles C. Little and James Brown.  1842.

        That there is no knowledge of God possible to man but a
subjective knowledge, -- no revelation but the development of the
individual within himself, and to himself, -- are prevalent
statements, which Mr. Brownson opposes by a single formula, that
_life is relative in its very nature_.  God alone is; all creatures
live by virtue of what is not themselves, no less than by virtue of
what is themselves, the prerogative of man being to do consciously,
that is, more or less intelligently.  Mr. Brownson carefully
discriminates between Essence and Life.  Essence, being object to
itself, alone has freedom, which is what the old theologians named
sovereignty; -- a noble word for the thing intended, were it not
desecrated in our associations, in being usurped by creatures that
are slaves to time and circumstance.  But life implies a causative
object, as well as causative subject; wherefore _creatures_ are only
free by Grace of God.

        That men should live, with God for predominating object, is the
Ideal of Humanity, or the Law of Holiness, in the highest sense; for
this object alone can emancipate them from what is below themselves.
But a nice discrimination must be made here.  The Ideal of Humanity,
as used by Mr. Brownson, does not mean the highest idea of himself,
which a man can form by induction on himself as an individual; it
means God's idea of man, which shines into every man from the
beginning; "Enlighteneth every man that cometh into the world,"
though his darkness comprehendeth it not, until it is "made flesh."
It is by virtue of that freedom which is God's alone, and which is
the issue of absolute love, that is, "because God so loved the
world," he takes up the subject, Jesus, and makes himself objective
to him without measure, thereby rendering his life as divine as it is
human, though it remains also as human, -- strictly speaking, -- as
it is divine.

        To all men's consciousness it is true that God is objective in
a degree, or they were not distinctively human.  His glory is
refracted, as it were, to their eyes, through the universe.  But only
in a man, to whom he has made himself the imperative object, does he
approach men, in all points, in such degree as to make them divine.
He is no less free (sovereign) in coming to each man in Christ, than,
in the first instance, in making Jesus of Nazareth the Christ.  Men
are only free inasmuch as they are open to this majestic access, and
are able to pray with St. Augustine, "What art thou to me, oh Lord?
_Have mercy on me that I may ask_.  The house of my soul is too
strait for thee to come into; but let it, oh Lord, be enlarged by
thee.  It is ruinous, but let it be repaired by thee," &c.

        The Unitarian Church, as Mr. Brownson thinks, indicates truth,
in so far as it insists on the life of Jesus as being that wherein we
find grace; but in so far as it does not perceive that this life is
something more than a series of good actions, which others may
reproduce, it leans on an arm of flesh, and puts an idol in the place
of Christ.  The Trinitarian Church, he thinks, therefore, has come
nearer the truth, by its formulas of doctrine; and especially the
Roman Catholic Church, by the Eucharist.  The error of both Churches
has been to predicate of the being, Jesus, what is only true of his
life.  The being, Jesus, was a man; his life is God.  It is the
doctrine of John the Evangelist throughout, that the soul lives by
the real presence of Jesus Christ, as literally as the body lives by
bread.  The unchristianized live only partially, by so much of the
word as shines in the darkness which may not hinder it quite.  This
partial life repeats in all time the prophecies of antiquity, and is
another witness to Jesus Christ, "the same yesterday, to-day, and
forever."

        Mr. Brownson thinks that he has thus discovered a formula of
"the faith once delivered to the saints," which goes behind and
annihilates the controversy between Unitarians and Trinitarians, and
may lead them both to a deeper comprehension and clearer expression
of the secret of life.

 
                       _Literary Intelligence_

        The death of Dr. Channing at Bennington in Vermont, on the 2d
October, is an event of great note to the whole country.  The great
loss of the community is mitigated by the new interest which
intellectual power always acquires by the death of the possessor.
Dr. Channing was a man of so much rectitude, and such power to
express his sense of right, that his value to this country, of which
he was a kind of public _Conscience_, can hardly be overestimated.
Not only his merits, but his limitations also, which made all his
virtues and talents intelligible and available for the correction and
elevation of society, made our Cato dear, and his loss not to be
repaired.  His interest in the times, and the fidelity and
independence, with which, for so many years, he had exercised that
censorship on commercial, political, and literary morals, which was
the spontaneous dictate of his character, had earned for him an
accumulated capital of veneration, which caused his opinion to be
waited for in each emergency, as that of the wisest and most upright
of judges.  We shall probably soon have an opportunity to give an
extended account of his character and genius.  In most parts of this
country notice has been taken of this event, and in London also.
Beside the published discourses of Messrs.  Gannett, Hedge, Clarke,
Parker, Pierpont, and Bellows, Mr. Bancroft made Dr. Channing's
genius the topic of a just tribute in a lecture before the Diffusion
Society at the Masonic Temple.  We regret that the city has not yet
felt the propriety of paying a public honor to the memory of one of
the truest and noblest of its citizens.

 

         _Confessions of St. Augustine_. Boston: E. P. Peabody.

        We heartily welcome this reprint from the recent London
edition, which was a revision, by the Oxford divines, of an old
English translation.  It is a rare addition to our religious library.
The great Augustine, -- one of the truest, richest, subtlest,
eloquentest of authors, comes now in this American dress, to stand on
the same shelf with his far-famed disciples, with A-Kempis, Herbert,
Taylor, Scougal, and Fenelon.  The Confessions have also a high
interest as one of the honestest autobiographies ever written.  In
this view it takes even rank with Montaigne's Essays, with Luther's
Table Talk, the Life of John Bunyan, with Rousseau's Confessions, and
the Life of Dr. Franklin.  In opening the book at random, we have
fallen on his reflections on the death of an early friend.

        "O madness, which knowest not how to love men like men!  I
fretted, sighed, wept, was distracted, had neither rest nor counsel.
For I bore about a shattered and bleeding soul, impatient of being
borne by me, yet where to repose it I found not.  All things looked
ghastly; yea the very light; whatsoever was not what he was, was
revolting and hateful, except groaning and tears.  In those alone
found I a little refreshment.  I fled out of my country; for so
should mine eyes look less for him where they were not wont to see
him.  And thus from Thagaste I came to Carthage.  Times lose no time;
nor do they roll idly by; through our senses they work strange
operations on the mind.  Behold, they went and came day by day, and
by coming and going introduced into my mind other imaginations and
other remembrances; and little by little patched me up again with my
old kind of delights unto which that my sorrow gave way.  And yet
there succeeded not indeed other griefs, yet the causes of other
griefs.  For whence had that former grief so easily reached my inmost
soul but that I had poured out my soul upon the dust in loving one,
that must die, as if he would never die.  For what restored and
refreshed me chiefly, was the solaces of other friends with whom I
did love what instead of thee I loved: and this was a |P1249|p1 great
fable and protracted lie, by whose adulterous stimulus our soul,
which lay itching in our ears, was defiled.  But that fable would not
die to me so oft as any of my friends died.  There were other things
which in them did more take my mind; to talk and jest together; to do
kind offices by turns; to read together honied books; to play the
fool or be earnest together; to dissent at times without discontent,
as a man might with his ownself; and even with the seldomness of
those dissentings, to season our more frequent consentings; sometimes
to teach, and sometimes learn; long for the absent with impatience,
and welcome the coming with joy."
        -- BOOK 4.

        _Europe and European Books_

        The American Academy, the Historical Society, and Harvard
University, would do well to make the Cunard steamers the subject of
examination in regard to their literary and ethical influence.  These
rapid sailers must be arraigned as the conspicuous agents in the
immense and increasing intercourse between the old and the new
continents.  We go to school to Europe.  We imbibe an European taste.
Our education, so called, -- our drilling at college, and our reading
since, -- has been European, and we write on the English culture and
to an English public, in America and in Europe.  This powerful star,
it is thought, will soon culminate and descend, and the impending
reduction of the transatlantic excess of influence on the American
education is already a matter of easy and frequent computation.  Our
eyes will be turned westward, and a new and stronger tone in
literature will be the result.  The Kentucky stumporatory, the
exploits of Boone and David Crockett, the journals of western
pioneers, agriculturalists, and socialists, and the letters of Jack
Downing, are genuine growths, which are sought with avidity in
Europe, where our European-like books are of no value.  It is easy to
see that soon the centre of population and property of the English
race, which long ago began its travels, and which is still on the
eastern shore, will shortly hover midway over the Atlantic main, and
then as certainly fall within the American coast, so that the writers
of the English tongue shall write to the American and not to the
island public, and then will the great Yankee be born.

        But at present we have our culture from Europe and Europeans.
Let us be content and thankful for these good gifts for a while yet.
The collections of art, at Dresden, Paris, Rome, and the British
Museum and libraries offer their splendid hospitalities to the
American.  And beyond this, amid the dense population of that
continent, lifts itself ever and anon some eminent head, a prophet to
his own people, and their interpreter to the people of other
countries.  The attraction of these individuals is not to be resisted
by theoretic statements.  It is true there is always something
deceptive, self-deceptive, in our travel.  We go to France, to
Germany, to see men, and find but what we carry.  A man is a man, one
as good as another, many doors to one open court, and that open court
as entirely accessible from our private door, or through John or
Peter, as through Humboldt or Laplace.  But we cannot speak to
ourselves.  We brood on our riches but remain dumb; that makes us
unhappy; and we take ship and go man-hunting in order to place
ourselves _en rapport_, according to laws of personal magnetism, to
acquire speech or expression.  Seeing Herschel or Schelling, or Swede
or Dane, satisfies the conditions, and we can express ourselves
happily.

        But Europe has lost weight lately.  Our young men go thither in
every ship, but not as in the golden days, when the same tour would
show the traveler the noble heads of Scott, of Mackintosh, Coleridge,
Wordsworth, Goethe, Cuvier, and Humboldt.  We remember when arriving
in Paris, we crossed the river on a brilliant morning, and at the
bookshop of Papinot, in the Rue de Sorbonne, at the gates of the
University, purchased for two sous a Programme, which announced that
every Monday we might attend the lecture of Dumas on Chemistry at
noon; at a half hour later either Villemain or Ampere on French
literature; at other hours, Guizot on Modern History; Cousin on the
Philosophy of Ancient History; Fauriel on Foreign Literature; Prevost
on Geology; Lacroix on the Differential Calculus: Jouffroy on the
History of Modern Philosophy; Lacretelle on Ancient History;
Desfontaines or Mirbel on Botany.

        Hard by, at the Place du Pantheon, Degerando, Royer Collard,
and their colleagues were giving courses on Law, on the law of
nations, the Pandects and commercial equity.  For two magical sous
more, we bought the Programme of the College Royal de France, on
which we still read with admiring memory, that every Monday,
Silvestre de Sacy lectures on the Persian language; at other hours,
Lacroix on the Integral Mathematics; Jouffroy on Greek Philosophy;
Biot on Physics; Lerminier on the History of Legislation; Elie de
Beaumont on Natural History; Magendie on Medicine; Thenard on
Chemistry; Binet on Astronomy; and so on, to the end of the week.  On
the same wonderful ticket, as if royal munificence had not yet
sufficed, we learned that at the Museum of Natural History, at the
Garden of Plants, three days in the week, Brongniart would teach
Vegetable Physiology, and Gay-Lussac Chemistry, and Flourent Anatomy.
With joy we read these splendid news in the Cafe Procope, and
straightway joined the troop of students of all nations, kindreds,
and tongues, whom this great institution drew together to listen to
the first _savans_ of the world without fee or reward.  The
professors are changed, but the liberal doors still stand open at
this hour.  This royal liberality, which seems to atone for so many
possible abuses of power, could not exist without important
consequences to the student on his return home.

        The University of Gottingen has sunk from its high place by the
loss of its brightest stars.  The last was Heeren, whose learning was
really useful, and who has made ingenious attempts at the solution of
ancient historical problems.  Ethiopia, Assyria, Carthage, and the
Theban Desart are still revealing secrets, latent for three
millenniums, under the powerful night glass of the Teutonic scholars,
who make astronomy, geology, chemistry, trade, statistics, medals,
tributary to their inquisitions.  In the last year also died
Sismondi, who by his History of the Italian Republics reminded
mankind of the prodigious wealth of life and event, which Time,
devouring his children as fast as they are born, is giving to
oblivion in Italy, the piazza and forum of History, and for a time
made Italian subjects of the middle age popular for poets, and
romancers, and by his kindling chronicles of Milan and Lombardy
perhaps awoke the great genius of Manzoni.  That history is full of
events, yet, as Ottilia writes in Goethe's novel, that she never can
bring away from history anything but a few anecdotes, so the "Italian
Republics" lies in the memory like a confused _melee_, a confused
noise of slaughter, and rapine, and garments rolled in blood.  The
method, if method there be, is so slight and artificial, that it is
quite overlaid and lost in the unvaried details of treachery and
violence.  Hallam's sketches of the same history were greatly more
luminous and memorable, partly from the advantage of his design,
which compelled him to draw outlines, and not bury the grand lines of
destiny in municipal details.  Italy furnished in that age no man of
genius to its political arena, though many of talent, and this want
degrades the history.  We still remember with great pleasure, Mr.
Hallam's fine sketch of the external history of the rise and
establishment of the Papacy, which Mr. Ranke's voluminous researches,
though they have great value for their individual portraits, have not
superseded.

        It was a brighter day than we have often known in our literary
calendar, when within the twelvemonth a single London advertisement
announced a new volume of poems by Wordsworth, poems by Tennyson, and
a play by Henry Taylor.  Wordsworth's nature or character has had all
the time it needed, in order to make its mark, and supply the want of
talent.  We have learned how to read him.  We have ceased to expect
that which he cannot give.  He has the merit of just moral
perception, but not that of deft poetic execution.  How would Milton
curl his lip at such slipshod newspaper style!  Many of his poems,
as, for example, the Rylstone Doe, might be all improvised.  Nothing
of Milton, nothing of Marvell, of Herbert, of Dryden, could be.
These are such verses as in a just state of culture should be _vers
de Societe_, such as every gentleman could write, but none would
think of printing or of claiming the poet's laurel on their merit.
The Pindar, the Shakspeare, the Dante, whilst they have the just and
open soul, have also the eye to see the dimmest star that glimmers in
the Milky Way, the serratures of every leaf, the test objects of the
microscope, and then the tongue to utter the same things in words
that engrave them on all the ears of mankind.  The poet demands all
gifts and not one or two only.

        The poet, like the electric rod, must reach from a point nearer
to the sky than all surrounding objects down to the earth, and down
to the dark wet soil, or neither is of use.  The poet must not only
converse with pure thought, but he must demonstrate it almost to the
senses.  His words must be pictures, his verses must be spheres and
cubes, to be seen, and smelled and handled.  His fable must be a good
story, and its meaning must hold as pure truth.  In the debates on
the Copyright Bill, in the English Parliament, Mr. Sergeant Wakley,
the coroner, quoted Wordsworth's poetry in derision, and asked the
roaring House of Commons, what that meant, and whether a man should
have a public reward for writing such stuff.  Homer, Horace, Milton,
and Chaucer would defy the coroner.  Whilst they have wisdom to the
wise, he would see, that to the external, they have external meaning.
Coleridge excellently said of poetry, that poetry must first be good
sense, as a palace might well be magnificent, but first it must be a
house.

        Wordsworth is open to ridicule of this kind.  And yet
Wordsworth, though satisfied if he can suggest to a sympathetic mind
his own mood, and though setting a private and exaggerated value on
his compositions, though confounding his accidental with the
universal consciousness, and taking the public to task for not
admiring his poetry, -- is really a superior master of the English
language, and his poems evince a power of diction that is no more
rivalled by his contemporaries, than is his poetic insight.  But the
capital merit of Wordsworth is, that he has done more for the sanity
of this generation than any other writer.  Early in life, at a
crisis, it is said, in his private affairs, he made his election
between assuming and defending some legal rights with the chances of
wealth and a position in the world -- and the inward promptings of
his heavenly genius; he took his part; he accepted the call to be a
poet, and sat down, far from cities, with coarse clothing and plain
fare to obey the heavenly vision.  The choice he had made in his
will, manifested itself in every line to be real.  We have poets who
write the poetry of society, of the patrician and conventional
Europe, as Scott and Moore, and others who, like Byron or Bulwer,
write the poetry of vice and disease.  But Wordsworth threw himself
into his place, made no reserves or stipulations; man and writer were
not to be divided.  He sat at the foot of Helvellyn and on the margin
of Winandermere, and took their lustrous mornings and their sublime
midnights for his theme, and not Marlow, nor Massinger, not Horace,
nor Milton, nor Dante.  He once for all forsook the styles, and
standards, and modes of thinking of London and Paris, and the books
read there, and the aims pursued, and wrote Helvellyn and
Winandermere, and the dim spirits which these haunts harbored.  There
was not the least attempt to reconcile these with the spirit of
fashion and selfishness, nor to show with great deference to the
superior judgment of dukes and earls, that although London was the
home for men of great parts, yet Westmoreland had these consolations
for such as fate had condemned to the country life; but with a
complete satisfaction, he pitied and rebuked their false lives, and
celebrated his own with the religion of a true priest.  Hence the
antagonism which was immediately felt between his poetry and the
spirit of the age, that here not only criticism but conscience and
will were parties; the spirit of literature, and the modes of living,
and the conventional theories of the conduct of life were called in
question on wholly new grounds, not from Platonism, nor from
Christianity, but from the lessons which the country muse taught a
stout pedestrian climbing a mountain, and in following a river from
its parent rill down to the sea.  The Cannings and Jeffreys of the
capital, the Court Journals and Literary Gazettes were not well
pleased, and voted the poet a bore.  But that which rose in him so
high as to the lips, rose in many others as high as to the heart.
What he said, they were prepared to hear and confirm.  The influence
was in the air, and was wafted up and down into lone and into
populous places, resisting the popular taste, modifying opinions
which it did not change, and soon came to be felt in poetry, in
criticism, in plans of life, and at last in legislation.  In this
country, it very early found a strong hold, and its effect may be
traced on all the poetry both of England and America.

        But notwithstanding all Wordsworth's grand merits, it was a
great pleasure to know that Alfred Tennyson's two volumes were coming
out in the same ship; it was a great pleasure to receive them.  The
elegance, the wit, and subtlety of this writer, his rich fancy, his
power of language, his metrical skill, his independence on any living
masters, his peculiar topics, his taste for the costly and gorgeous,
discriminate the musky poet of gardens and conservatories of parks
and palaces.  Perhaps we felt the popular objection that he wants
rude truth, he is too fine.  In these boudoirs of damask and
alabaster, one is farther off from stern nature and human life than
in Lallah Rookh and "the Loves of the Angels." Amid swinging censers
and perfumed lamps, amidst velvet and glory we long for rain and
frost.  Otto of roses is good, but wild air is better.  A critical
friend of ours affirms that the vice, which bereaved modern painters
of their power, is the ambition to begin where their fathers ended;
to equal the masters in their exquisite finish, instead of in their
religious purpose.  The painters are not willing to paint ill enough:
they will not paint for their times, agitated by the spirit which
agitates their country; so should their picture picture us and draw
all men after them; but they copy the technics of their predecessors,
and paint for their predecessors' public.  It seems as if the same
vice had worked in poetry.  Tennyson's compositions are not so much
poems as studies in poetry, or sketches after the styles of sundry
old masters.  He is not the husband who builds the homestead after
his own necessity, from foundation stone to chimney-top and turret,
but a tasteful bachelor who collects quaint stair cases and groined
ceilings.  We have no right to such superfineness.  We must not make
our bread of pure sugar.  These delicacies and splendors are then
legitimate when they are the excess of substantial and necessary
expenditure.  The best songs in English poetry are by that heavy,
hard, pedantic poet, Ben Jonson.  Jonson is rude, and only on rare
occasions gay.  Tennyson is always fine; but Jonson's beauty is more
grateful than Tennyson's.  It is a natural manly grace of a robust
workman.  Ben's flowers are not in pots, at a city florist's ranged
on a flower stand, but he is a countryman at a harvest-home,
attending his ox-cart from the fields, loaded with potatoes and
apples, with grapes and plums, with nuts and berries, and stuck with
boughs of hemlock and sweet briar, with ferns and pond lilies which
the children have gathered.  But let us not quarrel with our
benefactors.  Perhaps Tennyson is too quaint and elegant.  What then?
It is long since we have as good a lyrist; it will be long before we
have his superior.  "Godiva" is a noble poem that will tell the
legend a thousand years.  The poem of all the poetry of the present
age, for which we predict the longest term, is "Abou ben Adhem" of
Leigh Hunt.  Fortune will still have her part in every victory, and
it is strange that one of the best poems should be written by a man
who has hardly written any other.  And "Godiva" is a parable which
belongs to the same gospel.  "Locksley Hall" and "the Two Voices" are
meditative poems, which were slowly written to be slowly read.  "The
Talking Oak," though a little hurt by its wit and ingenuity, is
beautiful, and the most poetic of the volume.  "Ulysses" belongs to a
high class of poetry, destined to be the highest, and to be more
cultivated in the next generation.  "oEnone" was a sketch of the same
kind.  One of the best specimens we have of the class is Wordsworth's
"Laodamia," of which no special merit it can possess equals the total
merit of having selected such a subject in such a spirit.

        Next to the poetry the novels, which come to us in every ship
from England, have an importance increased by the immense extension
of their circulation through the new cheap press, which sends them to
so many willing thousands.  So much novel reading ought not to leave
the readers quite unaffected, and undoubtedly gives some tinge of
romance to the daily life of young merchants and maidens.  We have
heard it alleged, with some evidence, that the prominence given to
intellectual power in Bulwer's romances had proved a main stimulus to
mental culture in thousands of young men in England and America.  The
effect on manners cannot be less sensible, and we can easily believe
that the behavior of the ball room, and of the hotel has not failed
to draw some addition of dignity and grace from the fair ideals, with
which the imagination of a novelist has filled the heads of the most
imitative class.

        We are not very well versed in these books, yet we have read
Mr. Bulwer enough to see that the story is rapid and interesting; he
has really seen London society, and does not draw ignorant
caricatures.  He is not a genius, but his novels are marked with
great energy, and with a courage of experiment which in each instance
had its degree of success.  The story of Zanoni was one of those
world-fables which is so agreeable to the human imagination, that it
is found in some form in the language of every country, and is always
reappearing in literature.  Many of the details of this novel
preserve a poetic truth.  We read Zanoni with pleasure, because magic
is natural.  It is implied in all superior culture that a complete
man would need no auxiliaries to his personal presence.  The eye and
the word are certainly subtler and stronger weapons than either money
or knives.  Whoever looked on the hero, would consent to his will,
being certified that his aims were universal, not selfish; and he
would be obeyed as naturally as the rain and the sunshine are.  For
this reason, children delight in fairy tales.  Nature is described in
them as the servant of man, which they feel ought to be true.  But
Zanoni pains us, and the author loses our respect, because he
speedily betrays that he does not see the true limitations of the
charm; because the power with which his hero is armed, is a toy,
inasmuch as the power does not flow from its legitimate fountains in
the mind; is a power for London; a divine power converted into a
burglar's false key or a highwayman's pistol to rob and kill with.

        But Mr. Bulwer's recent stories have given us, who do not read
novels, occasion to think of this department of literature, supposed
to be the natural fruit and expression of the age.  We conceive that
the obvious division of modern romance is into two kinds; first, the
novels _of costume_ or _of circumstance_, which is the old style, and
vastly the most numerous.  In this class, the hero, without any
particular character, is in a very particular circumstance; he is
greatly in want of a fortune or of a wife, and usually of both, and
the business of the piece is to provide him suitably.  This is the
problem to be solved in thousands of English romances, including the
Porter novels and the more splendid examples of the Edgeworth and
Scott romances.

        It is curious how sleepy and foolish we are, that these tales
will so take us.  Again and again we have been caught in that old
foolish trap; -- then, as before, to feel indignant to have been
duped and dragged after a foolish boy and girl, to see them at last
married and portioned, and the reader instantly turned out of doors,
like a beggar that has followed a gay procession into a castle.  Had
one noble thought opening the chambers of the intellect, one
sentiment from the heart of God been spoken by them, the reader had
been made a participator of their triumph; he too had been an invited
and eternal guest; but this reward granted them is property,
all-excluding property, a little cake baked for them to eat and for
none other, nay, a preference and cosseting which is rude and
insulting to all but the minion.

        Excepting in the stories of Edgeworth and Scott, whose talent
knew how to give to the book a thousand adventitious graces, the
novels of costume are all one, and there is but one standard English
novel, like the one orthodox sermon, which with slight variation is
repeated every Sunday from so many pulpits.

 
        But the other novel, of which Wilhelm Meister is the best
specimen, the novel _of character_, treats the reader with more
respect; a castle and a wife are not the indispensable conclusion,
but the development of character being the problem, the reader is
made a partaker of the whole prosperity.  Every thing good in such a
story remains with the reader, when the book is closed.

        A noble book was Wilhelm Meister.  It gave the hint of a
cultivated society which we found nowhere else.  It was founded on
power to do what was necessary, each person finding it an
indispensable qualification of membership, that he could do something
useful, as in mechanics or agriculture or other indispensable art;
then a probity, a justice, was to be its element, symbolized by the
insisting that each property should be cleared of privilege, and
should pay its full tax to the State.  Then, a perception of beauty
was the equally indispensable element of the association, by which
each was so dignified and all were so dignified; then each was to
obey his genius to the length of abandonment.  They watched each
candidate vigilantly, without his knowing that he was observed, and
when he had given proof that he was a faithful man, then all doors,
all houses, all relations were open to him; high behavior fraternized
with high behavior, without question of heraldry and the only power
recognised is the force of character.

        The novels of Fashion of D'Israeli, Mrs. Gore, Mr. Ward, belong
to the class of novels of costume, because the aim is a purely
external success.

        Of the tales of fashionable life, by far the most agreeable and
the most efficient, was Vivian Grey.  Young men were and still are
the readers and victims.  Byron ruled for a time, but Vivian, with no
tithe of Byron's genius, rules longer.  One can distinguish at sight
the Vivians in all companies.  They would quiz their father, and
mother, and lover, and friend.  They discuss sun and planets, liberty
and fate, love and death, over the soup.  They never sleep, go
nowhere, stay nowhere, eat nothing, and know nobody, but are up to
anything, though it were the Genesis of nature, or the last
Cataclasm, -- Festus-like, Faust-like, Jove-like; and could write an
Iliad any rainy morning, if fame were not such a bore.  Men, women,
though the greatest and fairest, are stupid things; but a rifle, and
a mild pleasant gunpowder, a spaniel, and a cheroot, are themes for
Olympus.  I fear it was in part the influence of such pictures on
living society, which made the style of manners, of which we have so
many pictures, as for example, in the following account of the
English fashionist.  "His highest triumph is to appear with the most
wooden manners, as little polished as will suffice to avoid
castigation, nay, to contrive even his civilities, so that they may
appear as near as may be to affronts; instead of a noble high-bred
ease, to have the courage to offend against every restraint of
decorum, to invert the relation in which our sex stand to women, so
that they appear the attacking, and he the passive or defensive
party."

        We must here check our gossip in mid volley, and adjourn the
rest of our critical chapter to a more convenient season.

        _The Bible in Spain, or the Journeys, Adventures, and
Imprisonments of an Englishman in an attempt to circulate the
Scriptures in the Peninsula_.
        By GEORGE BORROW. Author of "The Gipsies in Spain.

        "This is a charming book, full of free breezes, and mountain
torrents, and pictures of romantic interest.  Mr. Borrow is a
self-sufficing man of free nature, his mind is always in the fresh
air; he is not unworthy to climb the sierras and rest beneath the
cork trees where we have so often enjoyed the company of Don Quixote.
And he has the merit, almost miraculous to-day, of leaving us almost
always to draw our own inferences from what he gives us.  We can
wander on in peace, secure against being forced back upon ourselves,
or forced sideways to himself.  It is as good to read through this
book of pictures, as to stay in a house hung with Gobelin tapestry.
The Gipsies are introduced here with even more spirit than in his
other book.  He sketches men and nature with the same bold and clear,
though careless touch.  Cape Finisterre and the entrance into
Gallicia are as good parts as any to look at.

 

                       _Paracelsus_

        Mr. Browning was known to us before, by a little book called
"Pippa Passes," full of bold openings, motley with talent like this,
and rich in touches of personal experience.  A version of the thought
of the day so much less penetrating than Faust and Festus cannot
detain us long; yet we are pleased to see each man in his kind
bearing witness, that neither sight nor thought will enable to attain
that golden crown which is the reward of life, of profound
experiences and gradual processes, the golden crown of wisdom.  The
artist nature is painted with great vigor in Aprile.  The author has
come nearer that, than to the philosophic nature.  There is music in
the love of Festus for his friend, especially in the last scene, the
thought of his taking sides with him against the divine judgment is
true as poesy.

 
 
        _Past and Present_
        By Thomas Carlyle.

        Here is Carlyle's new poem, his Iliad of English woes, to
follow his poem on France, entitled the History of the French
Revolution.  In its first aspect it is a political tract, and since
Burke, since Milton, we have had nothing to compare with it.  It
grapples honestly with the facts lying before all men, groups and
disposes them with a master's mind, -- and with a heart full of manly
tenderness, offers his best counsel to his brothers.  Obviously it is
the book of a powerful and accomplished thinker, who has looked with
naked eyes at the dreadful political signs in England for the last
few years, has conversed much on these topics with such wise men of
all ranks and parties as are drawn to a scholar's house, until such
daily and nightly meditation has grown into a great connexion, if not
a system of thoughts, and the topic of English politics becomes the
best vehicle for the expression of his recent thinking, recommended
to him by the desire to give some timely counsels, and to strip the
worst mischiefs of their plausibility.  It is a brave and just book,
and not a semblance.  "No new truth," say the critics on all sides.
Is it so? truth is very old; but the merit of seers is not to invent,
but to dispose objects in their right places, and he is the commander
who is always in the mount, whose eye not only sees details, but
throws crowds of details into their right arrangement and a larger
and juster totality than any other.  The book makes great approaches
to true contemporary history, a very rare success, and firmly holds
up to daylight the absurdities still tolerated in the English and
European system.  It is such an appeal to the conscience and honor of
England as cannot be forgotten, or be feigned to be forgotten.  It
has the merit which belongs to every honest book, that it was
self-examining before it was eloquent, and so hits all other men,
and, as the country people say of good preaching, "comes bounce down
into every pew." Every reader shall carry away something.  The
scholar shall read and write, the farmer and mechanic shall toil with
new resolution, nor forget the book when they resume their labor.

        Though no theocrat, and more than most philosophers a believer
in political systems, Mr. Carlyle very fairly finds the calamity of
the times not in bad bills of Parliament, nor the remedy in good
bills, but the vice in false and superficial aims of the people, and
the remedy in honesty and insight.  Like every work of genius, its
great value is in telling such simple truths.  As we recall the
topics, we are struck with the force given to the plain truths; the
picture of the English nation all sitting enchanted, the poor
enchanted so they cannot work, the rich enchanted so that they cannot
enjoy, and are rich in vain; the exposure of the progress of fraud
into all arts and social activities; the proposition, that the
laborer must have a greater share in his earnings; that the principle
of permanence shall be admitted into all contracts of mutual service;
that the state shall provide at least school-master's education for
all the citizens; the exhortation to the workman, that he shall
respect the work and not the wages; to the scholar, that he shall be
there for light; to the idle, that no man shall sit idle; the picture
of Abbot Samson, the true governor, who "is not there to expect
reason and nobleness of others, he is there to give them of his own
reason and nobleness;" and the assumption throughout the book, that a
new chivalry and nobility, namely the dynasty of labor is replacing
the old nobilities.  These things strike us with a force, which
reminds us of the morals of the Oriental or early Greek masters, and
of no modern book.  Truly in these things there is great reward.  It
is not by sitting still at a grand distance, and calling the human
race _larvae_, that men are to be helped, nor by helping the depraved
after their own foolish fashion, but by doing unweariedly the
particular work we were born to do.  Let no man think himself
absolved because he does a generous action and befriends the poor,
but let him see whether he so holds his property that a benefit goes
from it to all.  A man's diet should be what is simplest and readiest
to be had, because it is so private a good.  His house should be
better, because that is for the use of hundreds, perhaps of
thousands, and is the property of the traveler.  But his speech is a
perpetual and public instrument; let that always side with the race,
and yield neither a lie nor a sneer.  His manners, -- let them be
hospitable and civilizing, so that no Phidias or Raphael shall have
taught anything better in canvass or stone; and his acts should be
representative of the human race, as one who makes them rich in his
having and poor in his want.

        It requires great courage in a man of letters to handle the
contemporary practical questions; not because he then has all men for
his rivals, but because of the infinite entanglements of the problem,
and the waste of strength in gathering unripe fruits.  The task is
superhuman; and the poet knows well, that a little time will do more
than the most puissant genius.  Time stills the loud noise of
opinions, sinks the small, raises the great, so that the true emerges
without effort and in perfect harmony to all eyes; but the truth of
the present hour, except in particulars and single relations, is
unattainable.  Each man can very well know his own part of duty, if
he will; but to bring out the truth for beauty and as literature,
surmounts the powers of art.  The most elaborate history of to-day
will have the oddest dislocated look in the next generation.  The
historian of to-day is yet three ages off.  The poet cannot descend
into the turbid present without injury to his rarest gifts.  Hence
that necessity of isolation which genius has always felt.  He must
stand on his glass tripod, if he would keep his electricity.

        But when the political aspects are so calamitous, that the
sympathies of the man overpower the habits of the poet, a higher than
literary inspiration may succor him.  It is a costly proof of
character, that the most renowned scholar of England should take his
reputation in his hand, and should descend into the ring, and he has
added to his love whatever honor his opinions may forfeit.  To atone
for this departure from the vows of the scholar and his eternal
duties, to this secular charity, we have at least this gain, that
here is a message which those to whom it was addressed cannot choose
but hear.  Though they die, they must listen.  It is plain that
whether by hope or by fear, or were it only by delight in this
panorama of brilliant images, all the great classes of English
society must read, even those whose existence it proscribes.  Poor
Queen Victoria, -- poor Sir Robert Peel, -- poor Primate and Bishops,
-- poor Dukes and Lords! there is no help in place or pride, or in
looking another way; a grain of wit is more penetrating than the
lightning of the night-storm, which no curtains or shutters will keep
out.  Here is a book which will be read, no thanks to anybody but
itself.  What pains, what hopes, what vows, shall come of the
reading!  Here is a book as full of treason as an egg is full of
meat, and every lordship and worship and high form and ceremony of
English conservatism tossed like a foot-ball into the air, and kept
in the air with merciless kicks and rebounds, and yet not a word is
punishable by statute.  The wit has eluded all official zeal; and yet
these dire jokes, these cunning thrusts, this flaming sword of
Cherubim waved high in air illuminates the whole horizon, and shows
to the eyes of the universe every wound it inflicts.  Worst of all
for the party attacked, it bereaves them beforehand of all sympathy,
by anticipating the plea of poetic and humane conservatism, and
impressing the reader with the conviction, that the satirist himself
has the truest love for everything old and excellent in English land
and institutions, and a genuine respect for the basis of truth in
those whom he exposes.

        We are at some loss how to state what strikes us as the fault
of this remarkable book, for the variety and excellence of the talent
displayed in it is pretty sure to leave all special criticism in the
wrong.  And we may easily fail in expressing the general objection
which we feel.  It appears to us as a certain disproportion in the
picture, caused by the obtrusion of the whims of the painter.  In
this work, as in his former labors, Mr. Carlyle reminds us of a sick
giant.  His humors, are expressed with so much force of constitution,
that his fancies are more attractive and more credible than the
sanity of duller men.  But the habitual exaggeration of the tone
wearies whilst it stimulates.  It is felt to be so much deduction
from the universality of the picture.  It is not serene sunshine, but
everything is seen in lurid stormlights.  Every object attitudinizes,
to the very mountains and stars almost, under the refractions of this
wonderful humorist, and instead of the common earth and sky, we have
a Martin's Creation or Judgment Day.  A crisis has always arrived
which requires a _deus ex machina_.  One can hardly credit, whilst
under the spell of this magician, that the world always had the same
bankrupt look, to foregoing ages as to us, -- as of a failed world
just recollecting its old withered forces to begin again and try and
do a little business.  It was perhaps inseparable from the attempt to
write a book of wit and imagination on English politics that a
certain local emphasis and of effect, such as is the vice of
preaching, should appear, producing on the reader a feeling of
forlornness by the excess of value attributed to circumstances.  But
the splendor of wit cannot outdazzle the calm daylight, which always
shows every individual man in balance with his age, and able to work
out his own salvation from all the follies of that, and no such
glaring contrasts or severalties in that or this.  Each age has its
own follies, as its majority is made up of foolish young people; its
superstitions appear no superstitions to itself; and if you should
ask the contemporary, he would tell you with pride or with regret
(according as he was practical or poetic) that it had none.  But
after a short time, down go its follies and weakness, and the memory
of them; its virtues alone remain, and its limitation assumes the
poetic form of a beautiful superstition, as the dimness of our sight
clothes the objects in the horizon with mist and color.  The
revelation of Reason is this of the unchangeableness of the fact of
humanity under all its subjective aspects, that to the cowering it
always cowers, to the daring it opens great avenues.  The ancients
are only venerable to us, because distance has destroyed what was
trivial; as the sun and stars affect us only grandly, because we
cannot reach to their smoke and surfaces, and say, Is that all?

        And yet the gravity of the times, the manifold and increasing
dangers of the English state, may easily excuse some over-coloring of
the picture, and we at this distance are not so far removed from any
of the specific evils, and are deeply participant in too many, not to
share the gloom, and thank the love and the courage of the
counsellor.  This book is full of humanity, and nothing is more
excellent in this, as in all Mr. Carlyle's works, than the attitude
of the writer.  He has the dignity of a man of letters who knows what
belongs to him, and never deviates from his sphere; a continuer of
the great line of scholars, and sustains their office in the highest
credit and honor.  If the good heaven have any word to impart to this
unworthy generation, here is one scribe qualified and clothed for its
occasion.  One excellence he has in an age of Mammon and of
criticism, that he never suffers the eye of his wonder to close.  Let
who will be the dupe of trifles, he cannot keep his eye off from that
gracious Infinite which embosoms us.  As a literary artist, he has
great merits, beginning with the main one, that he never wrote one
dull line.  How well read, how adroit, what thousand arts in his one
art of writing; with his expedient for expressing those unproven
opinions, which he entertains but will not endorse, by summoning one
of his men of straw from the cell, and the respectable Sauerteig, or
Teufelsdrock, or Dryasdust, or Picturesque Traveller says what is put
into his mouth and disappears.  That morbid temperament has given his
rhetoric a somewhat bloated character, a luxury to many imaginative
and learned persons, like a showery south wind with its sunbursts and
rapid chasing of lights and glooms over the landscape, and yet its
offensiveness to multitudes of reluctant lovers makes us often wish
some concession were possible on the part of the humorist.  Yet it
must not be forgotten that in all his fun of castanets, or playing of
tunes with a whiplash like some renowned charioteers, -- in all this
glad and needful vending of his redundant spirits, -- he does yet
ever and anon, as if catching the glance of one wise man in the
crowd, quit his tempestuous key, and lance at him in clear level tone
the very word, and then with new glee returns to his game.  He is
like a lover or an outlaw who wraps up his message in a serenade,
which is nonsense to the sentinel, but salvation to the ear for which
it is meant.  He does not dodge the question, but gives sincerity
where it is due.

        One word more respecting this remarkable style.  We have in
literature few specimens of magnificence.  Plato is the purple
ancient, and Bacon and Milton the moderns of the richest strains.
Burke sometimes reaches to that exuberant fulness, though deficient
in depth.  Carlyle in his strange half mad way, has entered the Field
of the Cloth of Gold, and shown a vigor and wealth of resource, which
has no rival in the tourney play of these times; -- the indubitable
champion of England.  Carlyle is the first domestication of the
modern system with its infinity of details into style.  We have been
civilizing very fast, building London and Paris, and now planting New
England and India, New Holland and Oregon, -- and it has not appeared
in literature, -- there has been no analogous expansion and
recomposition in books.  Carlyle's style is the first emergence of
all this wealth and labor, with which the world has gone with child
so long.  London and Europe tunnelled, graded, corn-lawed, with
trade-nobility, and east and west Indies for dependencies, and
America, with the Rocky Hills in the horizon, have never before been
conquered in literature.  This is the first invasion and conquest.
How like an air-balloon or bird of Jove does he seem to float over
the continent, and stooping here and there pounce on a fact as a
symbol which was never a symbol before.  This is the first
experiment; and something of rudeness and haste must be pardoned to
so great an achievement.  It will be done again and again, sharper,
simpler, but fortunate is he who did it first, though never so
giant-like and fabulous.  This grandiose character pervades his wit
and his imagination.  We have never had anything in literature so
like earthquakes, as the laughter of Carlyle.  He "shakes with his
mountain mirth." It is like the laughter of the genii in the horizon.
These jokes shake down Parliament-house and Windsor Castle, Temple,
and Tower, and the future shall echo the dangerous peals.  The other
particular of magnificence is in his rhymes.  Carlyle is a poet who
is altogether too burly in his frame and habit to submit to the
limits of metre.  Yet he is full of rhythm not only in the perpetual
melody of his periods, but in the burdens, refrains, and grand
returns of his sense and music.  Whatever thought or motto has once
appeared to him fraught with meaning, becomes an omen to him
henceforward, and is sure to return with deeper tones and weightier
import, now as promise, now as threat, now as confirmation, in
gigantic reverberation, as if the hills, the horizon, and the next
ages returned the sound.

        _Antislavery Poems._
        By JOHN PIERPONT. Boston: Oliver Johnson.  1843.

        These poems are much the most readable of all the metrical
pieces we have met with on the subject; indeed, it is strange how
little poetry this old outrage of negro slavery has produced.
Cowper's lines in the Task are still the best we have.  Mr. Pierpont
has a good deal of talent, and writes very spirited verses, full of
point.  He has no continuous meaning which enables him to write a
long and equal poem, but every poem is a series of detached epigrams,
some better, some worse.  His taste is not always correct, and from
the boldest flight he shall suddenly alight in very low places.
Neither is the motive of the poem ever very high, so that they seem
to be rather squibs than prophecies or imprecations: but for
political satire, we think the "Word from a Petitioner" very strong,
and the "Gag" the best piece of poetical indignation in America.

 

        _Sonnets and other Poems._
        By WILLIAM LLOYD GARRISON.
        Boston. 1843. pp. 96.

        Mr. Garrison has won his palms in quite other fields than those
of the lyric muse, and he is far more likely to be the subject than
the author of good poems.  He is rich enough in the earnestness and
the success of his character to be patient with the very rapid
withering of the poetic garlands he has snatched in passing.  Yet
though this volume contains little poetry, both the subjects and the
sentiments will everywhere command respect.  That piece in the
volume, which pleased us most, was the address to his first-born
child.

 

        _America -- an Ode; and other Poems._
        By N. W. COFFIN. Boston: S. G. SIMPKINS.

        Our Maecenas shakes his head very doubtfully at this
well-printed Ode, and only says, "An ode nowadays needs to be
admirable to carry sail at all.  Mr. Sprague's Centennial Ode, and
Ode at the Shakspeare Jubilee, are the only American lyrics that we
have prospered in reading, -- if we dare still remember them." Yet he
adds mercifully, "The good verses run like golden brooks through the
dark forests of toil, rippling and musical, and undermine the heavy
banks till they fall in and are borne away.  Thirty-five pieces
follow the Ode, of which everything is neat, pretty, harmonious,
tasteful, the sentiment pleasing, manful, if not inspired.  If the
poet have nothing else, he has a good ear."

 

        _Poems by_
        WILLIAM ELLERY CHANNING. Boston. 1843.

        We have already expressed our faith in Mr. Channing's genius,
which in some of the finest and rarest traits of the poet is without
a rival in this country.  This little volume has already become a
sign of great hope and encouragement to the lovers of the muse.  The
refinement and the sincerity of his mind, not less than the
originality and delicacy of the diction, are not merits to be
suddenly apprehended, but are sure to find a cordial appreciation.
Yet we would willingly invite any lover of poetry to read "The
Earth-Spirit," "Reverence," "The Lover's Song," "Death," and "The
Poet's Hope."

 

        _A Letter_

        As we are very liable in common with the letter-writing world,
to fall behindhand in our correspondence, and a little more liable
because, in consequence of our editorial function, we receive more
epistles than our individual share, we have thought that we might
clear our account by writing a quarterly catholic letter to all and
several who have honored us in verse, or prose, with their
confidence, and expressed a curiosity to know our opinion.  We shall
be compelled to dispose very rapidly of quite miscellaneous topics.

        And first, in regard to the writer who has given us his
speculations on Rail-roads and Air-roads, our correspondent shall
have his own way.  To the rail-way, we must say, like the courageous
lord mayor at his first hunting, when told the hare was coming, "Let
it come, in Heaven's name, I am not afraid on 't." Very unlooked for
political and social effects of the iron road are fast appearing.  It
will require an expansion of the police of the old world.  When a
rail-road train shoots through Europe every day from Brussels to
Vienna, from Vienna to Constantinople, it cannot stop every twenty or
thirty miles, at a German customhouse, for examination of property
and passports.  But when our correspondent proceeds to
Flying-machines, we have no longer the smallest taper light of
credible information and experience left, and must speak on _a
priori_ grounds.  Shortly then, we think the population is not yet
quite fit for them, and therefore there will be none.  Our friend
suggests so many inconveniences from piracy out of the high air to
orchards and lone houses, and also to other high fliers, and the
total inadequacy of the present system of defence, that we have not
the heart to break the sleep of the good public by the repetition of
these details.  When children come into the library, we put the
inkstand and the watch on the high shelf, until they be a little
older; and nature has set the sun and moon in plain sight and use,
but laid them on the high shelf, where her roystering boys may not in
some mad Saturday afternoon pull them down or burn their fingers.
The sea and the iron road are safer toys for such ungrown people; we
are not yet ripe to be birds.

 
        In the next place, to fifteen letters on Communities, and the
Prospects of Culture, and the destinies of the cultivated class, --
what answer?  Excellent reasons have been shown us why the writers,
obviously persons of sincerity and of elegance, should be
dissatisfied with the life they lead, and with their company.  They
have exhausted all its benefit, and will not bear it much longer.
Excellent reasons they have shown why something better should be
tried.  They want a friend to whom they can speak and from whom they
may hear now and then a reasonable word.  They are willing to work,
so it be with friends.  They do not entertain anything absurd or even
difficult.  They do not wish to force society into hated reforms, nor
to break with society.  They do not wish a township, or any large
expenditure, or incorporated association, but simply a concentration
of chosen people.  By the slightest possible concert persevered in
through four or five years, they think that a neighborhood might be
formed of friends who would provoke each other to the best activity.

        They believe that this society would fill up the terrific chasm
of ennui, and would give their genius that inspiration which it seems
to wait in vain.  But `the selfishness!' One of the writers
relentingly says, What shall my uncles and aunts do without me? and
desires to be distinctly understood not to propose the Indian mode of
giving decrepit relatives as much of the mud of holy Ganges as they
can swallow, and more, but to begin the enterprise of concentration,
by concentrating all uncles and aunts in one delightful village by
themselves! -- so heedless is our correspondent of putting all the
dough into one pan, and all the leaven into another.  Another
objection seems to have occurred to a subtle but ardent advocate.  Is
it, he writes, a too great wilfulness and intermeddling with life, --
with life, which is better accepted than calculated?  Perhaps so; but
let us not be too curiously good; the Buddhist is a practical
Necessitarian; the Yankee is not.  We do a good many selfish things
every day; among them all let us do one thing of enlightened
selfishness.  It were fit to forbid concert and calculation in this
particular, if that were our system, if we were up to the mark of
self-denial and faith in our general activity.  But to be prudent in
all the particulars of life, and in this one thing alone religiously
forbearing; prudent to secure to ourselves an injurious society,
temptations to folly and despair, degrading examples and enemies; and
only abstinent when it is proposed to provide ourselves with guides,
examples, lovers!---

        We shall hardly trust ourselves to reply to arguments by which
we would too gladly be persuaded.  The more discontent, the better we
like it.  It is not for nothing, we assure ourselves, that our people
are busied with these projects of a better social state, and that
sincere persons of all parties are demanding somewhat vital and
poetic of our stagnant society.  How fantastic and unpresentable
soever the theory has hitherto seemed, how swiftly shrinking from the
examination of practical men, let us not lose the warning of that
most significant dream.  How joyfully we have felt the admonition of
larger natures which despised our aims and pursuits, conscious that a
voice out of heaven spoke to us in that scorn.  But it would be
unjust not to remind our younger friends that, whilst this aspiration
has always made its mark in the lives of men of thought, in vigorous
individuals it does not remain a detached object, but is satisfied
along with the satisfaction of other aims.  To live solitary and
unexpressed, is painful, -- painful in proportion to one's
consciousness of ripeness and equality to the offices of friendship.
But herein we are never quite forsaken by the Divine Providence.  The
loneliest man after twenty years discovers that he stood in a circle
of friends, who will then show like a close fraternity held by some
masonic tie.  But we are impatient of the tedious introductions of
Destiny, and a little faithless, and would venture something to
accelerate them.  One thing is plain, that discontent and the luxury
of tears will bring nothing to pass.  Regrets and Bohemian castles
and aesthetic villages are not a very self-helping class of
productions, but are the voices of debility.  Especially to one
importunate correspondent we must say, that there is no chance for
the aesthetic village.  Every one of the villagers has committed his
several blunder; his genius was good, his stars consenting, but he
was a marplot.  And though the recuperative force in every man may be
relied on infinitely, it must be relied on, before it will exert
itself.  As long as he sleeps in the shade of the present error, the
after-nature does not betray its resources.  Whilst he dwells in the
old sin, he will pay the old fine.

        More letters we have on the subject of the position of young
men, which accord well enough with what we see and hear.  There is an
American disease, a paralysis of the active faculties, which falls on
young men in this country, as soon as they have finished their
college education, which strips them of all manly aims and bereaves
them of animal spirits, so that the noblest youths are in a few years
converted into pale Caryatides to uphold the temple of conventions.
They are in the state of the young Persians, when "that mighty Yezdam
prophet" addressed them and said, "Behold the signs of evil days are
come; there is now no longer any right course of action, nor any
self-devotion left among the Iranis." As soon as they have arrived at
this term, there are no employments to satisfy them, they are
educated above the work of their times and country, and disdain it.
Many of the more acute minds pass into a lofty criticism of these
things, which only embitters their sensibility to the evil, and
widens the feeling of hostility between them and the citizens at
large.  From this cause, companies of the best educated young men in
the Atlantic states every week take their departure for Europe; for
no business that they have in that country, but simply because they
shall so be hid from the reproachful eyes of their countrymen, and
agreeably entertained for one or two years, with some lurking hope,
no doubt, that something may turn up to give them a decided
direction.  It is easy to see that this is only a postponement of
their proper work, with the additional disadvantage of a two years'
vacation.  Add that this class is rapidly increasing by the
infatuation of the active class, who, whilst they regard these young
Athenians with suspicion and dislike, educate their own children in
the same courses, and use all possible endeavors to secure to them
the same result.

        Certainly we are not insensible to this calamity, as described
by the observers or witnessed by ourselves.  It is not quite new and
peculiar, though we should not know where to find in literature any
record of so much unbalanced intellectuality; such undeniable
apprehension without talent, so much power without equal
applicability, as our young men pretend to.  Yet in Theodore Mundt's
(* 1) account of Frederic Holderlin's "Hyperion," we were not a
little struck with the following Jeremiad of the despair of Germany,
whose tone is still so familiar, that we were somewhat mortified to
find that it was written in 1799.

        (* 1) Geschichte der Literatur der Gegenwart.  1842. p. 86.

        "Then came I to the Germans.  I cannot conceive of a people
more disjoined than the Germans.  Mechanics you shall see, but no
man; priests, but no man; thinkers, but no man.  Is it not like some
battlefield, where hands and arms and all members lie scattered
about, whilst the life-blood runs away into the sand?  Let every man
mind his own, you say, and I say the same.  Only let him mind it with
all his heart, and not with this cold study, literally,
hypocritically to appear that which he passes for, but in good
earnest, and in all love, let him be that which he is; then there is
a soul in his deed.  And is he driven into a circumstance where the
spirit must not live, let him thrust it from him with scorn, and
learn to dig and plough.  There is nothing holy which is not
desecrated, which is not degraded to a mean end among this people.
It is heartrending to see your poet, your artist, and all who still
revere genius, who love and foster the Beautiful.  The Good!  They
live in the world as strangers in their own house; they are like the
patient Ulysses whilst he sat in the guise of a beggar at his own
door, whilst shameless rioters shouted in the hall and ask, who
brought the raggamuffin here?  Full of love, talent and hope, spring
up the darlings of the muse among the Germans; come seven years
later, and they flit about like ghosts, cold and silent; they are
like a soil which an enemy has sown with poison, that it will not
bear a blade of grass.  On earth all is imperfect! is the old proverb
of the German.  Aye, but if one should say to these Godforsaken, that
with them all is imperfect, only because they leave nothing pure
which they do not pollute, nothing holy which they do not defile with
their fumbling hands; that with them nothing prospers; because the
godlike nature which is the root of all prosperity, they do not
revere; that with them, truly, life is shallow and anxious and full
of discord, because they despise genius, which brings power and
nobleness into manly action, cheerfulness into endurance, and love
and brotherhood into towns and houses.  Where a people honors genius
in its artists, there breathes like an atmosphere a universal soul,
to which the shy sensibility opens, which melts self-conceit, -- all
hearts become pious and great, and it adds fire to heroes.  The home
of all men is with such a people, and there will the stranger gladly
abide.  But where the divine nature and the artist is crushed, the
sweetness of life is gone, and every other planet is better than the
earth.  Men deteriorate, folly increases, and a gross mind with it;
drunkenness comes with disaster; with the wantonness of the tongue
and with the anxiety for a livelihood, the blessing of every year
becomes a curse, and all the gods depart."

        The steep antagonism between the money-getting and the academic
class must be freely admitted, and perhaps is the more violent, that
whilst our work is imposed by the soil and the sea, our culture is
the tradition of Europe.  But we cannot share the desperation of our
contemporaries, least of all should we think a preternatural
enlargement of the intellect a calamity.  A new perception, the
smallest new activity given to the perceptive power, is a victory won
to the living universe from chaos and old night, and cheaply bought
by any amounts of hard-fare and false social position.  The balance
of mind and body will redress itself fast enough.  Superficialness is
the real distemper.  In all the cases we have ever seen where people
were supposed to suffer from too much wit, or as men said, from a
blade too sharp for the scabbard, it turned out that they had not wit
enough.  It may easily happen that we are grown very idle and must go
to work, and that the times must be worse before they are better.  It
is very certain, that speculation is no succedaneum for life.  What
we would know, we must do.  As if any taste or imagination could take
the place of fidelity!  The old Duty is the old God.  And we may come
to this by the rudest teaching.  A friend of ours went five years ago
to Illinois to buy a farm for his son.  Though there were crowds of
emigrants in the roads, the country was open on both sides, and long
intervals between hamlets and houses.  Now after five years he has
just been to visit the young farmer and see how he prospered, and
reports that a miracle has been wrought.  From Massachusetts to
Illinois, the land is fenced in and builded over, almost like New
England itself, and the proofs of thrifty cultivation everywhere
abound; -- a result not so much owing to the natural increase of
population, as to the hard times, which, driving men out of cities
and trade, forced them to take off their coats and go to work on the
land, which has rewarded them not only with wheat but with habits of
labor.  Perhaps the adversities of our commerce have not yet been
pushed to the wholesomest degree of severity.  Apathies and total
want of work and reflection on the imaginative character of American
life, &c. &c., are like seasickness, which never will obtain any
sympathy, if there is a woodpile in the yard, or an unweeded patch in
the garden; not to mention the graver absurdity of a youth of noble
aims, who can find no field for his energies, whilst the colossal
wrongs of the Indian, of the Negro, of the emigrant, remain
unmitigated, and the religious, civil, and judicial forms of the
country are confessedly effete and offensive.  We must refer our
clients back to themselves, believing that every man knows in his
heart the cure for the disease he so ostentatiously bewails.

        As far as our correspondents have entangled their private
griefs with the cause of American Literature, we counsel them to
disengage themselves as fast as possible.  In Cambridge orations, and
elsewhere, there is much inquiry for that great absentee American
Literature.  What can have become of it?  The least said is best.  A
literature is no man's private concern, but a secular and generic
result, and is the affair of a power which works by a prodigality of
life and force very dismaying to behold, -- the race never dying, the
individual never spared, and every trait of beauty purchased by
hecatombs of private tragedy.  The pruning in the wild gardens of
nature is never forborne.  Many of the best must die of consumption,
many of despair, and many be stupid and insane, before the one great
and fortunate life, which they each predicted, can shoot up into a
thrifty and beneficent existence.

        But passing to a letter which is a generous and a just tribute
to Bettina von Arnim, we have it in our power to furnish our
correspondent and all sympathizing readers with a sketch, (* 2)
though plainly from no very friendly hand, of the new work of that
eminent lady, who in the silence of Tieck and Schelling, seems to
hold a monopoly of genius in Germany.

        (* 2) We translate the following extract from the Berlin
Correspondence of the Deutsche Schnellpost of September.

        "At last has the long expected work of the Frau von Arnim here
appeared.  It is true her name is not prefixed; more properly is the
dedication, _This Book belongs to the King_, also the title; but
partly because her genius shines so unmistakeably out of every line,
partly because this work refers so directly to her earlier writings,
and appears only as an enlargement of them, none can doubt who the
author is.  We know not how we should characterize to the reader this
most original work.  Bettina, or we should say, the Frau von Arnim,
exhibits her eccentric wisdom under the person of Goethe's Mother,
the Frau Rath, whilst she herself is still a child, who, (1807) sits
upon `the shawl' at the foot of the Frau Rath, and listens devoutly
to the gifted mother of the great poet.  Moreover, Bettina does not
conceal that she solely, or at any rate principally, propounds _her_
views from the Frau Rath.  And in fact, it could not be otherwise,
since we come to hear the newest philosophical wisdom which makes a
strange enough figure in the mouth of Goethe's mother.  If we mistake
not, the intimate intercourse with Bruno Bauer is also an essential
impulse for Frau von Arnim, and we must not therefore wonder if the
Frau Rath loses her way in pure philosophical hypotheses, wherein she
avails herself of the known phrases of the school.  It is true, she
quickly recovers herself again, clothes her perceptions in poetical
garb, mounts bravely to the boldest visions, or, (and this oftenest
happens,) becomes a humorist, spices her discourses in Frankfort
dialect by idiomatic expressions, and hits off in her merriest humors
capital sketches.  For the most part, the whole humoristic dress
seems only assumed in order to make the matter, which is in the last
degree radical, less injurious.  As to the object of these `sayings
and narratives reported from memory' of the Frau Rath, (since she
leads the conversation throughout,) our sketch must be short.  `It is
Freedom which constitutes the truest being' of man.  Man should be
free from all traditions, from all prejudices, since every holding on
somewhat traditional, is unbelief, spiritual selfmurder.  The God's
impulse to truth is the only right belief.  Man himself should handle
and prove, `since whoever reflects on a matter, has always a better
right to truth, than who lets himself be slapped on the cheek by an
article-of-Faith.' By Sin she understands that which derogates from
the soul, since every hindrance and constraint interrupts the
Becoming of the soul.  In general, art and science have only the
destination to make free what is bound.  But the human spirit can
rule all, and, in that sense, `man is God, only we are not arrived so
far as to describe the true pure Man in us.'  If, in the department
of religion, this principle leads to the overthrow of the whole
historical Christendom, so, in the political world, it leads to the
ruin of all our actual governments.  Therefore she wishes for a
strong reformer, as Napoleon promised for a time to be, who, however,
already in 1807, when these conversations are ascribed to the Frau
Rath, had shown that instead of a world's liberator, he would be a
world's oppressor.  Bettina makes variations on the verse, `and wake
an avenger, a hero awake!' and in this sense is also her dedication
to read.  It were noble if a stronger one should come, who in more
beautiful moderation, in perfecter clearness of soul and freedom of
thought, should plant the tree of equity.  Where remains the Regent,
if it is not the genius of humanity? that is the Executive principle,
in her system.  The state has the same will, the same
conscience-voice for good and evil as the Christ; yet it crumbles
itself away into dogmaticalness of civil officers against one
another.  The transgressor is the state's own transgression! the
proof that it, as man, has trespassed against humanity.  The old
state's doctors, who excite it to a will, are also its disease.  But
they who do not agree in this will, and cannot struggle through
soul-narrowing relations, are the demagogues, against whom the
unsound state trespasses, so long as it knows not how to bring their
sound strength into harmony.  And precisely to those must it dedicate
itself, since they are its integration and restoration, whilst the
others who conform to it, make it more sunken and stagnant.  If it be
objected, that this her truth is only a poetic dream which in the
actual world has no place, she answers; `even were the truth a dream,
it is not therefore to be denied; let us dedicate our genius to this
dream, let us form an Ideal Paradise, which the spiritual system of
Nature requires at our hands.' `Is the whole fabric of state, she
asks, only a worse arranged hospital, where the selfish or the
ambitious would fasten on the poor human race the foolish fantastic
malversations of their roguery for beneficent co;auoperation? and
with it the political economy, so destitute of all genius to bind the
useful with the beautiful, on which these state's doctors plume
themselves so much, and so with their triviality exhibit as a pattern
to us, a wretched picture of ignorance, of selfishness, and of
iniquity; when I come on that, I feel my veins swell with wrath.  If
I come on the belied nature, or how should I call this spectre of
actuality!  Yea justly!  No! with these men armed in mail against
every poetic truth, we must not parley; the great fools' conspiracy
of that actuality-spectre defends with mock reasoning its Turkish
states'-conduct, before which certainly the revelation of the Ideal
withdraws into a poetic dream-region.' But whilst the existing state
in itself is merely null, whilst the transgressor against this state
is not incorporated with its authorizations with its directions and
tendencies, so is the transgressor ever the accuser of the state
itself.  In general, must the state draw up to itself at least the
lowest class, and not let it sink in mire; and Bettina lets the Frau
Rath make the proposal, instead of shutting up the felon in
penitentiaries, to instruct him in the sciences, as from his native
energies, from his unbroken powers, great performances might be
looked for.  But in order also to show practically the truth of her
assertions, that the present state does not fulfil its duties
especially to the poorest class, at the close of the book are
inserted, `Experiences of a young Swiss in Voigtland.' This person
visited the so-called Family-houses, which compose a colony of
extremest poverty.  There he went into many chambers, listened to the
history of the life, still oftener to the history of the day, of the
inhabitants; informed himself of their merit and their wants, and
comes to the gloomiest results.  The hard reproaches, which were made
against the Overseers of the Poor, appear unhappily only too well
founded.  We have hastily sketched, with a few literal quotations,
the contents of this remarkable book of this remarkable woman, and
there remains no space further to elaborate judgment.  The highflying
idealism, which the Frau von Arnim cherishes, founders and must
founder against the actuality which, as opposed to her imagination,
she holds for absolute nothing.  So reality, with her, always
converts itself to spectres, whilst these dreams are to her the only
reality.  In our opinion an energetic thorough experiment for the
realization of her ideas would plunge us in a deeper misery than we
at present have to deplore."

        _The Huguenots in France and America_

        The Huguenots is a very entertaining book, drawn from excellent
sources, rich in its topics, describing many admirable persons and
events, and supplies an old defect in our popular literature.  The
editor's part is performed with great assiduity and conscience.  Yet
amidst this enumeration of all the geniuses, and beauties, and
sanctities of France, what has the greatest man in France, at that
period, Michael de Montaigne, done, or left undone, that his name
should be quite omitted?

 
 

        _The Spanish Student. A Play in Three Acts_.
        By H. W.  Longfellow.

        A pleasing tale, but Cervantes shall speak for us out of _La
Gitanilla_.

        "You must know, Preciosa, that as to this name of _Poet_, few
are they who deserve it, -- and I am no _Poet_, but only a lover of
Poesy, so that I have no need to beg or borrow the verses of others.
The verses, I gave you the other day, are mine, and those of to-day
as well; -- but, for all that, I am no poet, neither is it my prayer
to be so."

        "Is it then so bad a thing to be a poet?" asked Preciosa.

        "Not bad," replied the Page, "but to be a poet and nought else,
I do not hold to be very good.  For poetry should be like a precious
jewel, whose owner does not put it on every day, nor show it to the
world at every step; but only when it is fitting, and when there is a
reason for showing it.  Poetry is a most lovely damsel; chaste,
modest, and discreet; spirited, but yet retiring, and ever holding
itself within the strictest rule of honor.  She is the friend of
Solitude.  She finds in the fountains her delight, in the fields her
counsellor, in the trees and flowers enjoyment and repose; and
lastly, she charms and instructs all that approach her."

 

        _The Dream of a Day, and other Poems_.
        By JAMES G. PERCIVAL.
        New Haven. 1843.

        Mr. Percival printed his last book of poems sixteen years ago,
and every school-boy learned to declaim his "Bunker Hill," since
which time, he informs us, his studies have been for the most part
very adverse to poetic inspirations.  Yet here we have specimens of
no less than one hundred and fifty different forms of stanza.  Such
thorough workmanship in the poetical art is without example or
approach in this country, and deserves all honor.  We have imitations
of four of the leading classes of ancient measures, -- the Dactylic,
Iambic, Anapestic, and Trochaic, to say nothing of rarer measures,
now never known out of colleges.  Then come songs for national airs,
formed on the rhythm of the music, including Norwegian, German,
Russian, Bohemian, Gaelic, and Welsh, -- Teutonian and Slavonian.
But unhappily this diligence is not without its dangers.  It has
prejudiced the creative power,

        "And made that art, which was a rage."

        Neatness, terseness, objectivity, or at any rate the absence of
subjectivity, characterize these poems.  Our bard has not quite so
much fire as we had looked for, grows warm but does not ignite; those
sixteen years of "adverse" studies have had their effect on Pegasus,
who now trots soundly and resolutely on, but forbears rash motions,
and never runs away with us.  The old critics of England were hardly
steadier to their triad of "Gower, Lydgate, and Chaucer," than our
American magazines to the trinity of "Bryant, Dana, and Percival." A
gentle constellation truly, all of the established religion, having
the good of their country and their species at heart.  Percival has
not written anything quite as good on the whole as his two fast
associates, but surpasses them both in labor, in his mimetic skill,
and in his objectiveness.  He is the most objective of the American
poets.  Bryant has a superb propriety of feeling, has plainly always
been in good society, but his sweet oaten pipe discourses only
pastoral music.  Dana has the most established religion, more
sentiment, more reverence, more of England; whilst Mr. Percival is an
upright, soldierly, free-spoken man, very much of a patriot, hates
cant, and does his best.

 

        _The Tragic_

        He has seen but half the universe who never has been shown the
House of Pain.  As the salt sea covers more than two thirds of the
surface of the globe, so sorrow encroaches in man on felicity.  The
conversation of men is a mixture of regrets and apprehensions.  I do
not know but the prevalent hue of things to the eye of leisure is
melancholy.  In the dark hours, our existence seems to be a defensive
war, a struggle against the encroaching All, which threatens surely
to engulf us soon, and is impatient of our short reprieve.  How
slender the possession that yet remains to us; how faint the
animation! how the spirit seems already to contract its domain,
retiring within narrower walls by the loss of memory, leaving its
planted fields to erasure and annihilation.  Already our own thoughts
and words have an alien sound.  There is a simultaneous diminution of
memory and hope.  Projects that once we laughed and leaped to
execute, find us, now sleepy and preparing to lie down in the snow.
And in the serene hours we have no courage to spare.  We cannot
afford to let go any advantages.  The riches of body or of mind which
we do not need today, are the reserved fund against the calamity that
may arrive tomorrow.  It is usually agreed that some nations have a
more sombre temperament, and one would say that history gave no
record of any society in which despondency came so readily to heart
as we see it and feel it in ours.  Melancholy cleaves to the English
mind in both hemispheres as closely as to the strings of an Aeolian
harp.  Men and women at thirty years, and even earlier, have lost all
spring and vivacity, and if they fail in their first enterprizes,
they throw up the game.  But whether we, and those who are next to
us, are more or less vulnerable, no theory of life can have any
right, which leaves out of account the values of vice, pain, disease,
poverty, insecurity, disunion, fear, and death.

        What are the conspicuous tragic elements in human nature?

        The bitterest tragic element in life to be derived from an
intellectual source is the belief in a brute Fate or Destiny; the
belief that the order of nature and events is controlled by a law not
adapted to man, nor man to that, but which holds on its way to the
end, serving him if his wishes chance to lie in the same course, --
crushing him if his wishes lie contrary to it, -- and heedless
whether it serves or crushes him.  This is the terrible idea that
lies at the foundation of the old Greek tragedy, and makes the
;oEdipus and Antigone and Orestes objects of such hopeless
commiseration.  They must perish, and there is no over-god to stop or
to mollify this hideous enginery that grinds and thunders, and takes
them up into its terrific system.  The same idea makes the paralyzing
terror with which the East Indian mythology haunts the imagination.
The same thought is the predestination of the Turk.  And universally
in uneducated and unreflecting persons, on whom too the religious
sentiment exerts little force, we discover traits of the same
superstition; `if you baulk water, you will be drowned the next
time:' `if you count ten stars, you will fall down dead:' `if you
spill the salt;' `if your fork sticks upright in the floor;' `if you
say the Lord's prayer backwards;' -- and so on, a several penalty,
nowise grounded in the nature of the thing, but on an arbitrary will.
But this terror of contravening an unascertained and unascertainable
will, cannot coexist with reflection: it disappears with
civilization, and can no more be reproduced than the fear of ghosts
after childhood.  It is discriminated from the doctrine of
Philosophical Necessity herein: that the last is an Optimism, and
therefore the suffering individual finds his good consulted in the
good of all, of which he is a part.  But in Destiny, it is not the
good of the whole or the _best will_ that is enacted, but only _one
particular will_.  Destiny properly is not a will at all, but an
immense whim; and this is the only ground of terror and despair in
the rational mind, and of tragedy in literature.  Hence the antique
tragedy, which was founded on this faith, can never be reproduced.

        But after the reason and faith have introduced a better public
and private tradition, the tragic element is somewhat circumscribed.
There must always remain, however, the hindrance of our private
satisfaction by the laws of the world.  The law which establishes
nature and the human race, continually thwarts the will of ignorant
individuals, and this in the particulars of disease, want,
insecurity, and disunion.

 
        But the essence of tragedy does not seem to me to lie in any
list of particular evils.  After we have enumerated famine, fever,
inaptitude, mutilation, rack, madness, and loss of friends, we have
not yet included the proper tragic element, which is Terror, and
which does not respect definite evils but indefinite; an ominous
spirit which haunts the afternoon and the night, idleness and
solitude.  A low haggard sprite sits by our side "casting the fashion
of uncertain evils," -- a sinister presentiment, a power of the
imagination to dislocate things orderly and cheerful, and show them
in startling disarray.  Hark! what sounds on the night wind, the cry
of Murder in that friendly house: see these marks of stamping feet,
of hidden riot.  The whisper overheard, the detected glance, the
glare of malignity, ungrounded fears, suspicions, half-knowledge, and
mistakes darken the brow and chill the heart of men.  And accordingly
it is natures not clear, not of quick and steady perceptions, but
imperfect characters from which somewhat is hidden that all others
see, who suffer most from these causes.  In those persons who move
the profoundest pity, tragedy seems to consist in temperament, not in
events.  There are people who have an appetite for grief, pleasure is
not strong enough and they crave pain, mithridatic stomachs which
must be fed on poisoned bread, natures so doomed that no prosperity
can soothe their ragged and dishevelled desolation.  They mis-hear
and mis-behold, they suspect and dread.  They handle every nettle and
ivy in the hedge, and tread on every snake in the meadow.

        "Come bad chance,
        And we add to it our strength,
        And we teach it art and length,
        Itself o'er us to advance."

        Frankly then it is necessary to say that all sorrow dwells in a
low region.  It is superficial; for the most part fantastic, or in
the appearance and not in things.  Tragedy is in the eye of the
observer, and not in the heart of the sufferer.  It looks like an
insupportable load under which earth moans aloud, but analyze it; it
is not I, it is not you, it is always another person who is
tormented.  If a man says, lo I suffer, -- it is apparent that he
suffers not, for grief is dumb.  It is so distributed as not to
destroy.  That which would rend you, falls on tougher textures.  That
which seems intolerable reproach or bereavement, does not take from
the accused or bereaved man or woman appetite or sleep.  Some men are
above grief, and some below it.  Few are capable of love.  In
phlegmatic natures calamity is unaffecting, in shallow natures it is
rhetorical.  Tragedy must be somewhat which I can respect.  A
querulous habit is not tragedy.  A panic such as frequently in
ancient or savage nations put a troop or an army to flight without an
enemy; a fear of ghosts; a terror of freezing to death that seizes a
man in a winter midnight on the moors; a fright at uncertain sounds
heard by a family at night in the cellar or on the stairs; are
terrors that make the knees knock and the teeth chatter, but are no
tragedy, any more than sea-sickness, which may also destroy life.  It
is full of illusion.  As it comes, it has its support.  The most
exposed classes, soldiers, sailors, paupers, are nowise destitute of
animal spirits.  The spirit is true to itself, and finds its own
support in any condition, learns to live in what is called calamity,
as easily as in what is called felicity, as the frailest glass-bell
will support a weight of a thousand pounds of water at the bottom of
a river or sea, if filled with the same.

        A man should not commit his tranquillity to things, but should
keep as much as possible the reins in his own hands, rarely giving
way to extreme emotion of joy or grief.  It is observed that the
earliest works of the art of sculpture are countenances of sublime
tranquillity.  The Egyptian sphinxes, which sit today as they sat
when the Greek came and saw them and departed, and when the Roman
came and saw them and departed, and as they will still sit when the
Turk, the Frenchman, and the Englishman, who visit them now, shall
have passed by, "with their stony eyes fixed on the East and on the
Nile," have countenances expressive of complacency and repose, an
expression of health, deserving their longevity, and verifying the
primeval sentence of history on the permanency of that people; "Their
strength is to sit still." To this architectural stability of the
human form, the Greek genius added an ideal beauty, without
disturbing the seals of serenity; permitting no violence of mirth, or
wrath, or suffering.  This was true to human nature.  For, in life,
actions are few, opinions even few, prayers few; loves, hatreds, or
any emissions of the soul.  All that life demands of us through the
greater part of the day, is an equilibrium, a readiness, open eyes
and ears, and free hands.  Society asks this, and truth, and love,
and the genius of our life.  There is a fire in some men which
demands an outlet in some rude action; they betray their impatience
of quiet by an irregular Catalinarian gait; by irregular, faltering,
disturbed speech, too emphatic for the occasion.  They treat trifles
with a tragic air.  This is not beautiful.  Could they not lay a rod
or two of stone wall, and work off this superabundant irritability.
When two strangers meet in the highway, what each demands of the
other is, that the aspect should show a firm mind, ready for any
event of good or ill, prepared alike to give death or to give life,
as the emergency of the next moment may require.  We must walk as
guests in nature, -- not impassioned, but cool and disengaged.  A man
should try time, and his face should wear the expression of a just
judge, who has nowise made up his opinion, who fears nothing and even
hopes nothing, but who puts nature and fortune on their merits: he
will hear the case out, and then decide.  For all melancholy, as all
passion, belongs to the exterior life.  Whilst a man is not grounded
in the divine life by his proper roots, he clings by some tendrils of
affection to society, -- mayhap to what is best and greatest in it,
and in calm times it will not appear that he is adrift and not
moored; but let any shock take place in society, any revolution of
custom, of law, of opinion, and at once his type of permanence is
shaken.  The disorder of his neighbors appears to him universal
disorder; chaos is come again.  But in truth he was already a driving
wreck, before the wind arose which only revealed to him his vagabond
state.  If a man is centred, men and events appear to him a fair
image or reflection of that which he knoweth beforehand in himself.
If any perversity or profligacy break out in society, he will join
with others to avert the mischief, but it will not arouse resentment
or fear, because he discerns its impassable limits.  He sees already
in the ebullition of sin, the simultaneous redress.

        Particular reliefs, also, fit themselves to human calamities,
for the world will be in equilibrium, and hates all manner of
exaggeration.  Time, the consoler, time, the rich carrier of all
changes, dries the freshest tears by obtruding new figures, new
costumes, new roads, on our eye, new voices on our ear.  As the west
wind lifts up again the heads of the wheat which were bent down and
lodged in the storm, and combs out the matted and dishevelled grass
as it lay in night-locks on the ground, so we let in time as a drying
wind into the seed-field of thoughts which are dank and wet, and
low-bent.  Time restores to them temper and elasticity.  How fast we
forget the blow that threatened to cripple us.  Nature will not sit
still; the faculties will do somewhat; new hopes spring, new
affections twine, and the broken is whole again.

        Time consoles, but Temperament resists the impression of pain.
Nature proportions her defence to the assault.  Our human being is
wonderfully plastic, if it cannot win this satisfaction here, it
makes itself amends by running out there and winning that.  It is
like a stream of water, which, if dammed up on one bank, over-runs
the other, and flows equally at its own convenience over sand, or
mud, or marble.  Most suffering is only apparent.  We fancy it is
torture: the patient has his own compensations.  A tender American
girl doubts of Divine Providence whilst she reads the horrors of "the
middle passage:" and they are bad enough at the mildest; but to such
as she these crucifixions do not come: they come to the obtuse and
barbarous, to whom they are not horrid, but only a little worse than
the old sufferings.  They exchange a cannibal war for the stench of
the hold.  They have gratifications which would be none to the
civilized girl.  The market-man never damned the lady because she had
not paid her bill, but the stout Irish woman has to take that once a
month.  She, however, never feels weakness in her back because of the
slave-trade.  This self-adapting strength is especially seen in
disease.  "It is my duty," says Sir Charles Bell, "to visit certain
wards of the hospital where there is no patient admitted but with
that complaint which most fills the imagination with the idea of
insupportable pain and certain death.  Yet these wards are not the
least remarkable for the composure and cheerfulness of their inmates.
The individual who suffers has a mysterious counterbalance to that
condition, which, to us who look upon her, appears to be attended
with no alleviating circumstance." Analogous supplies are made to
those individuals whose character leads them to vast exertions of
body and mind.  Napoleon said to one of his friends at St. Helena,
"Nature seems to have calculated that I should have great reverses to
endure, for she has given me a temperament like a block of marble.
Thunder cannot move it; the shaft merely glides along.  The great
events of my life have slipped over me without making any impression
on my moral or physical nature."

        The intellect is a consoler, which delights in detaching, or
putting an interval between a man and his fortune, and so converts
the sufferer into a spectator, and his pain into poetry.  It yields
the joys of conversation, of letters, and of science.  Hence also the
torments of life become tuneful tragedy, solemn and soft with music,
and garnished with rich dark pictures.  But higher still than the
activities of art, the intellect in its purity, and the moral sense
in its purity, are not distinguished from each other, and both ravish
us into a region whereinto these passionate clouds of sorrow cannot
rise.
.
                         ENGLISH TRAITS
                     by Ralph Waldo Emerson

 
 
 
        Chapter I _First Visit to England_

        I have been twice in England.  In 1833, on my return from a
short tour in Sicily, Italy, and France, I crossed from Boulogne, and
landed in London at the Tower stairs.  It was a dark Sunday morning;
there were few people in the streets; and I remember the pleasure of
that first walk on English ground, with my companion, an American
artist, from the Tower up through Cheapside and the Strand, to a
house in Russell Square, whither we had been recommended to good
chambers.  For the first time for many months we were forced to check
the saucy habit of travellers' criticism, as we could no longer speak
aloud in the streets without being understood.  The shop-signs spoke
our language; our country names were on the door-plates; and the
public and private buildings wore a more native and wonted front.

        Like most young men at that time, I was much indebted to the
men of Edinburgh, and of the Edinburgh Review, -- to Jeffrey,
Mackintosh, Hallam, and to Scott, Playfair, and De Quincey; and my
narrow and desultory reading had inspired the wish to see the faces
of three or four writers, -- Coleridge, Wordsworth, Landor, De
Quincey, and the latest and strongest contributor to the critical
journals, Carlyle; and I suppose if I had sifted the reasons that led
me to Europe, when I was ill and was advised to travel, it was mainly
the attraction of these persons.  If Goethe had been still living, I
might have wandered into Germany also.  Besides those I have named,
(for Scott was dead,) there was not in Britain the man living whom I
cared to behold, unless it were the Duke of Wellington, whom I
afterwards saw at Westminster Abbey, at the funeral of Wilberforce.
The young scholar fancies it happiness enough to live with people who
can give an inside to the world; without reflecting that they are
prisoners, too, of their own thought, and cannot apply themselves to
yours.  The conditions of literary success are almost destructive of
the best social power, as they do not leave that frolic liberty which
only can encounter a companion on the best terms.  It is probable you
left some obscure comrade at a tavern, or in the farms, with right
mother-wit, and equality to life, when you crossed sea and land to
play bo-peep with celebrated scribes.  I have, however, found writers
superior to their books, and I cling to my first belief, that a
strong head will dispose fast enough of these impediments, and give
one the satisfaction of reality, the sense of having been met, and a
larger horizon.

        On looking over the diary of my journey in 1833, I find nothing
to publish in my memoranda of visits to places.  But I have copied
the few notes I made of visits to persons, as they respect parties
quite too good and too transparent to the whole world to make it
needful to affect any prudery of suppression about a few hints of
those bright personalities.

        At Florence, chief among artists I found Horatio Greenough, the
American sculptor.  His face was so handsome, and his person so well
formed, that he might be pardoned, if, as was alleged, the face of
his Medora, and the figure of a colossal Achilles in clay, were
idealizations of his own.  Greenough was a superior man, ardent and
eloquent, and all his opinions had elevation and magnanimity.  He
believed that the Greeks had wrought in schools or fraternities, --
the genius of the master imparting his design to his friends, and
inflaming them with it, and when his strength was spent, a new hand,
with equal heat, continued the work; and so by relays, until it was
finished in every part with equal fire.  This was necessary in so
refractory a material as stone; and he thought art would never
prosper until we left our shy jealous ways, and worked in society as
they.  All his thoughts breathed the same generosity.  He was an
accurate and a deep man.  He was a votary of the Greeks, and
impatient of Gothic art.  His paper on Architecture, published in
1843, announced in advance the leading thoughts of Mr. Ruskin on the
_morality_ in architecture, notwithstanding the antagonism in their
views of the history of art.  I have a private letter from him, --
later, but respecting the same period, -- in which he roughly
sketches his own theory.  "Here is my theory of structure: A
scientific arrangement of spaces and forms to functions and to site;
an emphasis of features proportioned to their _gradated_ importance
in function; color and ornament to be decided and arranged and varied
by strictly organic laws, having a distinct reason for each decision;
the entire and immediate banishment of all make-shift and
make-believe."

        Greenough brought me, through a common friend, an invitation
from Mr. Landor, who lived at San Domenica di Fiesole.  On the 15th
May I dined with Mr. Landor.  I found him noble and courteous, living
in a cloud of pictures at his Villa Gherardesca, a fine house
commanding a beautiful landscape.  I had inferred from his books, or
magnified from some anecdotes, an impression of Achillean wrath, --
an untamable petulance.  I do not know whether the imputation were
just or not, but certainly on this May day his courtesy veiled that
haughty mind, and he was the most patient and gentle of hosts.  He
praised the beautiful cyclamen which grows all about Florence; he
admired Washington; talked of Wordsworth, Byron, Massinger, Beaumont
and Fletcher.  To be sure, he is decided in his opinions, likes to
surprise, and is well content to impress, if possible, his English
whim upon the immutable past.  No great man ever had a great son, if
Philip and Alexander be not an exception; and Philip he calls the
greater man.  In art, he loves the Greeks, and in sculpture, them
only.  He prefers the Venus to every thing else, and, after that, the
head of Alexander, in the gallery here.  He prefers John of Bologna
to Michael Angelo; in painting, Raffaelle; and shares the growing
taste for Perugino and the early masters.  The Greek histories he
thought the only good; and after them, Voltaire's.  I could not make
him praise Mackintosh, nor my more recent friends; Montaigne very
cordially, -- and Charron also, which seemed undiscriminating.  He
thought Degerando indebted to "Lucas on Happiness" and "Lucas on
Holiness"!  He pestered me with Southey; but who is Southey?

        He invited me to breakfast on Friday.  On Friday I did not fail
to go, and this time with Greenough.  He entertained us at once with
reciting half a dozen hexameter lines of Julius Caesar's! -- from
Donatus, he said.  He glorified Lord Chesterfield more than was
necessary, and undervalued Burke, and undervalued Socrates;
designated as three of the greatest of men, Washington, Phocion, and
Timoleon; much as our pomologists, in their lists, select the three
or the six best pears "for a small orchard;" and did not even omit to
remark the similar termination of their names.  "A great man," he
said, "should make great sacrifices, and kill his hundred oxen,
without knowing whether they would be consumed by gods and heroes, or
whether the flies would eat them." I had visited Professor Amici, who
had shown me his microscopes, magnifying (it was said) two thousand
diameters; and I spoke of the uses to which they were applied.
Landor despised entomology, yet, in the same breath, said, "the
sublime was in a grain of dust." I suppose I teased him about recent
writers, but he professed never to have heard of Herschel, _not even
by name._ One room was full of pictures, which he likes to show,
especially one piece, standing before which, he said "he would give
fifty guineas to the man that would swear it was a Domenichino."  I
was more curious to see his library, but Mr. H----, one of the
guests, told me that Mr. Landor gives away his books, and has never
more than a dozen at a time in his house.

        Mr. Landor carries to its height the love of freak which the
English delight to indulge, as if to signalize their commanding
freedom.  He has a wonderful brain, despotic, violent, and
inexhaustible, meant for a soldier, by what chance converted to
letters, in which there is not a style nor a tint not known to him,
yet with an English appetite for action and heroes.  The thing done
avails, and not what is said about it.  An original sentence, a step
forward, is worth more than all the censures.  Landor is strangely
undervalued in England; usually ignored; and sometimes savagely
attacked in the Reviews.  The criticism may be right, or wrong, and
is quickly forgotten; but year after year the scholar must still go
back to Landor for a multitude of elegant sentences -- for wisdom,
wit, and indignation that are unforgetable.

        From London, on the 5th August, I went to Highgate, and wrote a
note to Mr. Coleridge, requesting leave to pay my respects to him.
It was near noon.  Mr. Coleridge sent a verbal message, that he was
in bed, but if I would call after one o'clock, he would see me.  I
returned at one, and he appeared, a short, thick old man, with bright
blue eyes and fine clear complexion, leaning on his cane.  He took
snuff freely, which presently soiled his cravat and neat black suit.
He asked whether I knew Allston, and spoke warmly of his merits and
doings when he knew him in Rome; what a master of the Titianesque he
was, &c., &c.  He spoke of Dr. Channing.  It was an unspeakable
misfortune that he should have turned out a Unitarian after all.  On
this, he burst into a declamation on the folly and ignorance of
Unitarianism, -- its high unreasonableness; and taking up Bishop
Waterland's book, which lay on the table, he read with vehemence two
or three pages written by himself in the fly-leaves, -- passages,
too, which, I believe, are printed in the "Aids to Reflection." When
he stopped to take breath, I interposed, that, "whilst I highly
valued all his explanations, I was bound to tell him that I was born
and bred a Unitarian." "Yes," he said, "I supposed so;" and continued
as before.  `It was a wonder, that after so many ages of
unquestioning acquiescence in the doctrine of St. Paul, -- the
doctrine of the Trinity, which was also, according to Philo Judaeus,
the doctrine of the Jews before Christ, -- this handful of
Priestleians should take on themselves to deny it, &c., &c.  He was
very sorry that Dr. Channing, -- a man to whom he looked up, -- no,
to say that he looked _up_ to him would be to speak falsely; but a
man whom he looked _at_ with so much interest, -- should embrace such
views.  When he saw Dr. Channing, he had hinted to him that he was
afraid he loved Christianity for what was lovely and excellent, -- he
loved the good in it, and not the true; and I tell you, sir, that I
have known ten persons who loved the good, for one person who loved
the true; but it is a far greater virtue to lovethe true for itself
alone, than to love the good for itself alone.  He (Coleridge) knew
all about Unitarianism perfectly well, because he had once been a
Unitarian, and knew what quackery it was.  He had been called "the
rising star of Unitarianism."' He went on defining, or rather
refining: `The Trinitarian doctrine was realism; the idea of God was
not essential, but superessential;' talked of _trinism_ and
_tetrakism_, and much more, of which I only caught this, `that the
will was that by which a person is a person; because, if one should
push me in the street, and so I should force the man next me into the
kennel, I should at once exclaim, "I did not do it, sir," meaning it
was not my will.' And this also, `that if you should insist on your
faith here in England, and I on mine, mine would be the hotter side
of the fagot.'

        I took advantage of a pause to say, that he had many readers of
all religious opinions in America, and I proceeded to inquire if the
"extract" from the Independent's pamphlet, in the third volume of the
Friend, were a veritable quotation.  He replied, that it was really
taken from a pamphlet in his possession, entitled "A Protest of one
of the Independents," or something to that effect.  I told him how
excellent I thought it, and how much I wished to see the entire work.
"Yes," he said, "the man was a chaos of truths, but lacked the
knowledge that God was a God of order.  Yet the passage would no
doubt strike you more in the quotation than in the original, for I
have filtered it."

        When I rose to go, he said, "I do not know whether you care
about poetry, but I will repeat some verses I lately made on my
baptismal anniversary," and he recited with strong emphasis,
standing, ten or twelve lines, beginning,

        "Born unto God in Christ ----"

        He inquired where I had been travelling; and on learning that I
had been in Malta and Sicily, he compared one island with the other,
`repeating what he had said to the Bishop of London when he returned
from that country, that Sicily was an excellent school of political
economy; for, in any town there, it only needed to ask what the
government enacted, and reverse that to know what ought to be done;
it was the most felicitously opposite legislation to any thing good
and wise.  There were only three things which the government had
brought into that garden of delights, namely, itch, pox, and famine.
Whereas, in Malta, the force of law and mind was seen, in making that
barren rock of semi-Saracen inhabitants the seat of population and
plenty.' Going out, he showed me in the next apartment a picture of
Allston's, and told me `that Montague, a picture-dealer, once came to
see him, and, glancing towards this, said, "Well, you have got a
picture!" thinking it the work of an old master; afterwards,
Montague, still talking with his back to the canvas, put up his hand
and touched it, and exclaimed, "By Heaven! this picture is not ten
years old:" -- so delicate and skilful was that man's touch.'

        I was in his company for about an hour, but find it impossible
to recall the largest part of his discourse, which was often like so
many printed paragraphs in his book, -- perhaps the same, -- so
readily did he fall into certain commonplaces.  As I might have
foreseen, the visit was rather a spectacle than a conversation, of no
use beyond the satisfaction of my curiosity.  He was old and
preoccupied, and could not bend to a new companion and think with
him.

        From Edinburgh I went to the Highlands.  On my return, I came
from Glasgow to Dumfries, and being intent on delivering a letter
which I had brought from Rome, inquired for Craigenputtock.  It was a
farm in Nithsdale, in the parish of Dunscore, sixteen miles distant.
No public coach passed near it, so I took a private carriage from the
inn.  I found the house amid desolate heathery hills, where the
lonely scholar nourished his mighty heart.  Carlyle was a man from
his youth, an author who did not need to hide from his readers, and
as absolute a man of the world, unknown and exiled on that hill-farm,
as if holding on his own terms what is best in London.  He was tall
and gaunt, with a cliff-like brow, self-possessed, and holding his
extraordinary powers of conversation in easy command; clinging to his
northern accent with evident relish; full of lively anecdote, and
with a streaming humor, which floated every thing he looked upon.
His talk playfully exalting the familiar objects, put the companion
at once into an acquaintance with his Lars and Lemurs, and it was
very pleasant to learn what was predestined to be a pretty mythology.
Few were the objects and lonely the man, "not a person to speak to
within sixteen miles except the minister of Dunscore;" so that books
inevitably made his topics.

        He had names of his own for all the matters familiar to his
discourse.  "Blackwood's" was the "sand magazine;" "Fraser's" nearer
approach to possibility of life was the "mud magazine;" a piece of
road near by that marked some failed enterprise was the "grave of the
last sixpence." When too much praise of any genius annoyed him, he
professed hugely to admire the talent shown by his pig.  He had spent
much time and contrivance in confining the poor beast to one
enclosure in his pen, but pig, by great strokes of judgment, had
found out how to let a board down, and had foiled him.  For all that,
he still thought man the most plastic little fellow in the planet,
and he liked Nero's death, _"Qualis artifex pereo!"_ better than most
history.  He worships a man that will manifest any truth to him.  At
one time he had inquired and read a good deal about America.
Landor's principle was mere rebellion, and _that_ he feared was the
American principle.  The best thing he knew of that country was, that
in it a man can have meat for his labor.  He had read in Stewart's
book, that when he inquired in a New York hotel for the Boots, he had
been shown across the street and had found Mungo in his own house
dining on roast turkey.

        We talked of books.  Plato he does not read, and he disparaged
Socrates; and, when pressed, persisted in making Mirabeau a hero.
Gibbon he called the splendid bridge from the old world to the new.
His own reading had been multifarious.  Tristram Shandy was one of
his first books after Robinson Crusoe, and Robertson's America an
early favorite.  Rousseau's Confessions had discovered to him that he
was not a dunce; and it was now ten years since he had learned
German, by the advice of a man who told him he would find in that
language what he wanted.

        He took despairing or satirical views of literature at this
moment; recounted the incredible sums paid in one year by the great
booksellers for puffing.  Hence it comes that no newspaper is trusted
now, no books are bought, and the booksellers are on the eve of
bankruptcy.

        He still returned to English pauperism, the crowded country,
the selfish abdication by public men of all that public persons
should perform.  `Government should direct poor men what to do.  Poor
Irish folk come wandering over these moors.  My dame makes it a rule
to give to every son of Adam bread to eat, and supplies his wants to
the next house.  But here are thousands of acres which might give
them all meat, and nobody to bid these poor Irish go to the moor and
till it.  They burned the stacks, and so found a way to force the
rich people to attend to them.'

        We went out to walk over long hills, and looked at Criffel then
without his cap, and down into Wordsworth's country.  There we sat
down, and talked of the immortality of the soul.  It was not
Carlyle's fault that we talked on that topic, for he had the natural
disinclination of every nimble spirit to bruise itself against walls,
and did not like to place himself where no step can be taken.  But he
was honest and true, and cognizant of the subtile links that bind
ages together, and saw how every event affects all the future.
`Christ died on the tree: that built Dunscore kirk yonder: that
brought you and me together.  Time has only a relative existence.'

        He was already turning his eyes towards London with a scholar's
appreciation.  London is the heart of the world, he said, wonderful
only from the mass of human beings.  He liked the huge machine.  Each
keeps its own round.  The baker's boy brings muffins to the window at
a fixed hour every day, and that is all the Londoner knows or wishes
to know on the subject.  But it turned out good men.  He named
certain individuals, especially one man of letters, his friend, the
best mind he knew, whom London had well served.

        On the 28th August, I went to Rydal Mount, to pay my respects
to Mr. Wordsworth.  His daughters called in their father, a plain,
elderly, white-haired man, not prepossessing, and disfigured by green
goggles.  He sat down, and talked with great simplicity.  He had just
returned from a journey.  His health was good, but he had broken a
tooth by a fall, when walking with two lawyers, and had said, that he
was glad it did not happen forty years ago; whereupon they had
praised his philosophy.

        He had much to say of America, the more that it gave occasion
for his favorite topic, -- that society is being enlightened by a
superficial tuition, out of all proportion to its being restrained by
moral culture.  Schools do no good.  Tuition is not education.  He
thinks more of the education of circumstances than of tuition.  'Tis
not question whether there are offences of which the law takes
cognizance, but whether there are offences of which the law does not
take cognizance.  Sin is what he fears, and how society is to escape
without gravest mischiefs from this source -- ?  He has even said,
what seemed a paradox, that they needed a civil war in America, to
teach the necessity of knitting the social ties stronger.  `There may
be,' he said, `in America some vulgarity in manner, but that's not
important.  That comes of the pioneer state of things.  But I fear
they are too much given to the making of money; and secondly, to
politics; that they make political distinction the end, and not the
means.  And I fear they lack a class of men of leisure, -- in short,
of gentlemen, -- to give a tone of honor to the community.  I am told
that things are boasted of in the second class of society there,
which, in England, -- God knows, are done in England every day, --
but would never be spoken of.  In America I wish to know not how many
churches or schools, but what newspapers?  My friend, Colonel
Hamilton, at the foot of the hill, who was a year in America, assures
me that the newspapers are atrocious, and accuse members of Congress
of stealing spoons!' He was against taking off the tax on newspapers
in England, which the reformers represent as a tax upon knowledge,
for this reason, that they would be inundated with base prints.  He
said, he talked on political aspects, for he wished to impress on me
and all good Americans to cultivate the moral, the conservative, &c.,
&c., and never to call into action the physical strength of the
people, as had just now been done in England in the Reform Bill, -- a
thing prophesied by Delolme.  He alluded once or twice to his
conversation with Dr. Channing, who had recently visited him, (laying
his hand on a particular chair in which the Doctor had sat.)

        The conversation turned on books.  Lucretius he esteems a far
higher poet than Virgil: not in his system, which is nothing, but in
his power of illustration.  Faith is necessary to explain any thing,
and to reconcile the foreknowledge of God with human evil.  Of
Cousin, (whose lectures we had all been reading in Boston,) he knew
only the name.

        I inquired if he had read Carlyle's critical articles and
translations.  He said, he thought him sometimes insane.  He
proceeded to abuse Goethe's Wilhelm Meister heartily.  It was full of
all manner of fornication.  It was like the crossing of flies in the
air.  He had never gone farther than the first part; so disgusted was
he that he threw the book across the room.  I deprecated this wrath,
and said what I could for the better parts of the book; and he
courteously promised to look at it again.  Carlyle, he said, wrote
most obscurely.  He was clever and deep, but he defied the sympathies
of every body.  Even Mr. Coleridge wrote more clearly, though he had
always wished Coleridge would write more to be understood.  He led me
out into his garden, and showed me the gravel walk in which thousands
of his lines were composed.  His eyes are much inflamed.  This is no
loss, except for reading, because he never writes prose, and of
poetry he carries even hundreds of lines in his head before writing
them.  He had just returned from a visit to Staffa, and within three
days had made three sonnets on Fingal's Cave, and was composing a
fourth, when he was called in to see me.  He said, "If you are
interested in my verses, perhaps you will like to hear these lines."
I gladly assented; and he recollected himself for a few moments, and
then stood forth and repeated, one after the other, the three entire
sonnets with great animation.  I fancied the second and third more
beautiful than his poems are wont to be.  The third is addressed to
the flowers, which, he said, especially the oxeye daisy, are very
abundant on the top of the rock.  The second alludes to the name of
the cave, which is "Cave of Music;" the first to the circumstance of
its being visited by the promiscuous company of the steamboat.

        This recitation was so unlooked for and surprising, -- he, the
old Wordsworth, standing apart, and reciting to me in a garden-walk,
like a schoolboy declaiming, -- that I at first was near to laugh;
but recollecting myself, that I had come thus far to see a poet, and
he was chanting poems to me, I saw that he was right and I was wrong,
and gladly gave myself up to hear.  I told him how much the few
printed extracts had quickened the desire to possess his unpublished
poems.  He replied, he never was in haste to publish; partly, because
he corrected a good deal, and every alteration is ungraciously
received after printing; but what he had written would be printed,
whether he lived or died.  I said, "Tintern Abbey" appeared to be the
favorite poem with the public, but more contemplative readers
preferred the first books of the "Excursion," and the Sonnets.  He
said, "Yes, they are better." He preferred such of his poems as
touched the affections, to any others; for whatever is didactic, --
what theories of society, and so on, -- might perish quickly; but
whatever combined a truth with an affection was {ktema es aei}, good
to-day and good forever.  He cited the sonnet "On the feelings of a
high-minded Spaniard," which he preferred to any other, (I so
understood him,) and the "Two Voices;" and quoted, with evident
pleasure, the verses addressed "To the Skylark." In this connection,
he said of the Newtonian theory, that it might yet be superseded and
forgotten; and Dalton's atomic theory.

        When I prepared to depart, he said he wished to show me what a
common person in England could do, and he led me into the enclosure
of his clerk, a young man, to whom he had given this slip of ground,
which was laid out, or its natural capabilities shown, with much
taste.  He then said he would show me a better way towards the inn;
and he walked a good part of a mile, talking, and ever and anon
stopping short to impress the word or the verse, and finally parted
from me with great kindness, and returned across the fields.

        Wordsworth honored himself by his simple adherence to truth,
and was very willing not to shine; but he surprised by the hard
limits of his thought.  To judge from a single conversation, he made
the impression of a narrow and very English mind; of one who paid for
his rare elevation by general tameness and conformity.  Off his own
beat, his opinions were of no value.  It is not very rare to find
persons loving sympathy and ease, who expiate their departure from
the common, in one direction, by their conformity in every other.

 
 
 
        Chapter II _Voyage to England_

        The occasion of my second visit to England was an invitation
from some Mechanics' Institutes in Lancashire and Yorkshire, which
separately are organized much in the same way as our New England
Lyceums, but, in 1847, had been linked into a "Union," which embraced
twenty or thirty towns and cities, and presently extended into the
middle counties, and northward into Scotland.  I was invited, on
liberal terms, to read a series of lectures in them all.  The request
was urged with every kind suggestion, and every assurance of aid and
comfort, by friendliest parties in Manchester, who, in the sequel,
amply redeemed their word.  The remuneration was equivalent to the
fees at that time paid in this country for the like services.  At all
events, it was sufficient to cover any travelling expenses, and the
proposal offered an excellent opportunity of seeing the interior of
England and Scotland, by means of a home, and a committee of
intelligent friends, awaiting me in every town.

        I did not go very willingly.  I am not a good traveller, nor
have I found that long journeys yield a fair share of reasonable
hours.  But the invitation was repeated and pressed at a moment of
more leisure, and when I was a little spent by some unusual studies.
I wanted a change and a tonic, and England was proposed to me.
Besides, there were, at least, the dread attraction and salutary
influences of the sea.  So I took my berth in the packet-ship
Washington Irving, and sailed from Boston on Tuesday, 5th October,
1847.

        On Friday at noon, we had only made one hundred and thirty-four
miles.  A nimble Indian would have swum as far; but the captain
affirmed that the ship would show us in time all her paces, and we
crept along through the floating drift of boards, logs, and chips,
which the rivers of Maine and New Brunswick pour into the sea after a
freshet.

        At last, on Sunday night, after doing one day's work in four,
the storm came, the winds blew, and we flew before a north-wester,
which strained every rope and sail.  The good ship darts through the
water all day, all night, like a fish, quivering with speed, gliding
through liquid leagues, sliding from horizon to horizon.  She has
passed Cape Sable; she has reached the Banks; the land-birds are
left; gulls, haglets, ducks, petrels, swim, dive, and hover around;
no fishermen; she has passed the Banks; left five sail behind her,
far on the edge of the west at sundown, which were far east of us at
morn, -- though they say at sea a stern chase is a long race, -- and
still we fly for our lives.  The shortest sea-line from Boston to
Liverpool is 2850 miles.  This a steamer keeps, and saves 150 miles.
A sailing ship can never go in a shorter line than 3000, and usually
it is much longer.  Our good master keeps his kites up to the last
moment, studding-sails alow and aloft, and, by incessant straight
steering, never loses a rod of way.  Watchfulness is the law of the
ship, -- watch on watch, for advantage and for life.  Since the ship
was built, it seems, the master never slept but in his day-clothes
whilst on board.  "There are many advantages," says Saadi, "in
sea-voyaging, but security is not one of them." Yet in hurrying over
these abysses, whatever dangers we are running into, we are certainly
running out of the risks of hundreds of miles every day, which have
their own chances of squall, collision, sea-stroke, piracy, cold, and
thunder.  Hour for hour, the risk on a steamboat is greater; but the
speed is safety, or, twelve days of danger, instead of twenty-four.

        Our ship was registered 750 tons, and weighed perhaps, with all
her freight, 1500 tons.  The mainmast, from the deck to the
top-button, measured 115 feet; the length of the deck, from stem to
stern, 155.  It is impossible not to personify a ship; every body
does, in every thing they say: -- she behaves well; she minds her
rudder; she swims like a duck; she runs her nose into the water; she
looks into a port.  Then that wonderful _esprit du corps_, by which
we adopt into our self-love every thing we touch, makes us all
champions of her sailing qualities.

        The conscious ship hears all the praise.  In one week she has
made 1467 miles, and now, at night, seems to hear the steamer behind
her, which left Boston to-day at two, has mended her speed, and is
flying before the gray south wind eleven and a half knots the hour.
The sea-fire shines in her wake, and far around wherever a wave
breaks.  I read the hour, 9h.  45', on my watch by this light.  Near
the equator, you can read small print by it; and the mate describes
the phosphoric insects, when taken up in a pail, as shaped like a
Carolina potato.

        I find the sea-life an acquired taste, like that for tomatoes
and olives.  The confinement, cold, motion, noise, and odor are not
to be dispensed with.  The floor of your room is sloped at an angle
of twenty or thirty degrees, and I waked every morning with the
belief that some one was tipping up my berth.  Nobody likes to be
treated ignominiously, upset, shoved against the side of the house,
rolled over, suffocated with bilge, mephitis, and stewing oil.  We
get used to these annoyances at last, but the dread of the sea
remains longer.  The sea is masculine, the type of active strength.
Look, what egg-shells are drifting all over it, each one, like ours,
filled with men in ecstasies of terror, alternating with cockney
conceit, as the sea is rough or smooth.  Is this sad-colored circle
an eternal cemetery?  In our graveyards we scoop a pit, but this
aggressive water opens mile-wide pits and chasms, and makes a
mouthful of a fleet.  To the geologist, the sea is the only
firmament; the land is in perpetual flux and change, now blown up
like a tumor, now sunk in a chasm, and the registered observations of
a few hundred years find it in a perpetual tilt, rising and falling.
The sea keeps its old level; and 'tis no wonder that the history of
our race is so recent, if the roar of the ocean is silencing our
traditions.  A rising of the sea, such as has been observed, say an
inch in a century, from east to west on the land, will bury all the
towns, monuments, bones, and knowledge of mankind, steadily and
insensibly.  If it is capable of these great and secular mischiefs,
it is quite as ready at private and local damage; and of this no
landsman seems so fearful as the seaman.  Such discomfort and such
danger as the narratives of the captain and mate disclose are bad
enough as the costly fee we pay for entrance to Europe; but the
wonder is always new that any sane man can be a sailor.  And here, on
the second day of our voyage, stepped out a little boy in his
shirt-sleeves, who had hid himself, whilst the ship was in port, in
the bread-closet, having no money, and wishing to go to England.  The
sailors have dressed him in Guernsey frock, with a knife in his belt,
and he is climbing nimbly about after them, "likes the work
first-rate, and, if the captain will take him, means now to come back
again in the ship." The mate avers that this is the history of all
sailors; nine out of ten are runaway boys; and adds, that all of them
are sick of the sea, but stay in it out of pride.  Jack has a life of
risks, incessant abuse, and the worst pay.  It is a little better
with the mate, and not very much better with the captain.  A hundred
dollars a month is reckoned high pay.  If sailors were contented, if
they had not resolved again and again not to go to sea any more, I
should respect them.

        Of course, the inconveniences and terrors of the sea are not of
any account to those whose minds are preoccupied.  The water-laws,
arctic frost, the mountain, the mine, only shatter cockneyism; every
noble activity makes room for itself.  A great mind is a good sailor,
as a great heart is.  And the sea is not slow in disclosing
inestimable secrets to a good naturalist.

        'Tis a good rule in every journey to provide some piece of
liberal study to rescue the hours which bad weather, bad company, and
taverns steal from the best economist.  Classics which at home are
drowsily read have a strange charm in a country inn, or in the
transom of a merchant brig.  I remember that some of the happiest and
most valuable hours I have owed to books, passed, many years ago, on
shipboard.  The worst impediment I have found at sea is the want of
light in the cabin.

        We found on board the usual cabin library; Basil Hall, Dumas,
Dickens, Bulwer, Balzac, and Sand were our sea-gods.  Among the
passengers, there was some variety of talent and profession; we
exchanged our experiences, and all learned something.  The busiest
talk with leisure and convenience at sea, and sometimes a memorable
fact turns up, which you have long had a vacant niche for, and seize
with the joy of a collector.  But, under the best conditions, a
voyage is one of the severest tests to try a man.  A college
examination is nothing to it.  Sea-days are long, -- these
lack-lustre, joyless days which whistled over us; but they were few,
-- only fifteen, as the captain counted, sixteen according to me.
Reckoned from the time when we left soundings, our speed was such
that the captain drew the line of his course in red ink on his chart,
for the encouragement or envy of future navigators.

 
        It has been said that the King of England would consult his
dignity by giving audience to foreign ambassadors in the cabin of a
man-of-war.  And I think the white path of an Atlantic ship the right
avenue to the palace front of this sea-faring people, who for
hundreds of years claimed the strict sovereignty of the sea, and
exacted toll and the striking sail from the ships of all other
peoples.  When their privilege was disputed by the Dutch and other
junior marines, on the plea that you could never anchor on the same
wave, or hold property in what was always flowing, the English did
not stick to claim the channel, or bottom of all the main.  "As if,"
said they, "we contended for the drops of the sea, and not for its
situation, or the bed of those waters.  The sea is bounded by his
majesty's empire."

        As we neared the land, its genius was felt.  This was
inevitably the British side.  In every man's thought arises now a new
system, English sentiments, English loves and fears, English history
and social modes.  Yesterday, every passenger had measured the speed
of the ship by watching the bubbles over the ship's bulwarks.
To-day, instead of bubbles, we measure by Kinsale, Cork, Waterford,
and Ardmore.  There lay the green shore of Ireland, like some coast
of plenty.  We could see towns, towers, churches, harvests; but the
curse of eight hundred years we could not discern.

 
 
 
        Chapter III _Land_

        Alfieri thought Italy and England the only countries worth
living in; the former, because there nature vindicates her rights,
and triumphs over the evils inflicted by the governments; the latter,
because art conquers nature, and transforms a rude, ungenial land
into a paradise of comfort and plenty.  England is a garden.  Under
an ash-colored sky, the fields have been combed and rolled till they
appear to have been finished with a pencil instead of a plough.  The
solidity of the structures that compose the towns speaks the industry
of ages.  Nothing is left as it was made.  Rivers, hills, valleys,
the sea itself feel the hand of a master.  The long habitation of a
powerful and ingenious race has turned every rood of land to its best
use, has found all the capabilities, the arable soil, the quarriable
rock, the highways, the byways, the fords, the navigable waters; and
the new arts of intercourse meet you every where; so that England is
a huge phalanstery, where all that man wants is provided within the
precinct.  Cushioned and comforted in every manner, the traveller
rides as on a cannon-ball, high and low, over rivers and towns,
through mountains, in tunnels of three or four miles, at near twice
the speed of our trains; and reads quietly the Times newspaper,
which, by its immense correspondence and reporting, seems to have
machinized the rest of the world for his occasion.

        The problem of the traveller landing at Liverpool is, Why
England is England?  What are the elements of that power which the
English hold over other nations?  If there be one test of national
genius universally accepted, it is success; and if there be one
successful country in the universe for the last millennium, that
country is England.

        A wise traveller will naturally choose to visit the best of
actual nations; and an American has more reasons than another to draw
him to Britain.  In all that is done or begun by the Americans
towards right thinking or practice, we are met by a civilization
already settled and overpowering.  The culture of the day, the
thoughts and aims of men, are English thoughts and aims.  A nation
considerable for a thousand years since Egbert, it has, in the last
centuries, obtained the ascendant, and stamped the knowledge,
activity, and power of mankind with its impress.  Those who resist it
do not feel it or obey it less.  The Russian in his snows is aiming
to be English.  The Turk and Chinese also are making awkward efforts
to be English.  The practical common-sense of modern society, the
utilitarian direction which labor, laws, opinion, religion take, is
the natural genius of the British mind.  The influence of France is a
constituent of modern civility, but not enough opposed to the English
for the most wholesome effect.  The American is only the continuation
of the English genius into new conditions, more or less propitious.

        See what books fill our libraries.  Every book we read, every
biography, play, romance, in whatever form, is still English history
and manners.  So that a sensible Englishman once said to me, "As long
as you do not grant us copyright, we shall have the teaching of you."

        But we have the same difficulty in making a social or moral
estimate of England, as the sheriff finds in drawing a jury to try
some cause which has agitated the whole community, and on which every
body finds himself an interested party.  Officers, jurors, judges
have all taken sides.  England has inoculated all nations with her
civilization, intelligence, and tastes; and, to resist the tyranny
and prepossession of the British element, a serious man must aid
himself, by comparing with it the civilizations of the farthest east
and west, the old Greek, the Oriental, and, much more, the ideal
standard, if only by means of the very impatience which English forms
are sure to awaken in independent minds.

        Besides, if we will visit London, the present time is the best
time, as some signs portend that it has reached its highest point.
It is observed that the English interest us a little less within a
few years; and hence the impression that the British power has
culminated, is in solstice, or already declining.

        As soon as you enter England, which, with Wales, is no larger
than the State of Georgia, (*) this little land stretches by an
illusion to the dimensions of an empire.  The innumerable details,
the crowded succession of towns, cities, cathedrals, castles, and
great and decorated estates, the number and power of the trades and
guilds, the military strength and splendor, the multitudes of rich
and of remarkable people, the servants and equipages, -- all these
catching the eye, and never allowing it to pause, hide all
boundaries, by the impression of magnificence and endless wealth.

        (*) Add South Carolina, and you have more than an equivalent
for the area of Scotland.

        I reply to all the urgencies that refer me to this and that
object indispensably to be seen, -- Yes, to see England well needs a
hundred years; for, what they told me was the merit of Sir John
Soane's Museum, in London, -- that it was well packed and well saved,
-- is the merit of England; -- it is stuffed full, in all corners and
crevices, with towns, towers, churches, villas, palaces, hospitals,
and charity-houses.  In the history of art, it is a long way from a
cromlech to York minster; yet all the intermediate steps may still be
traced in this all-preserving island.

        The territory has a singular perfection.  The climate is warmer
by many degrees than it is entitled to by latitude.  Neither hot nor
cold, there is no hour in the whole year when one cannot work.  Here
is no winter, but such days as we have in Massachusetts in November,
a temperature which makes no exhausting demand on human strength, but
allows the attainment of the largest stature.  Charles the Second
said, "it invited men abroad more days in the year and more hours in
the day than another country." Then England has all the materials of
a working country except wood.  The constant rain, -- a rain with
every tide, in some parts of the island, -- keeps its multitude of
rivers full, and brings agricultural production up to the highest
point.  It has plenty of water, of stone, of potter's clay, of coal,
of salt, and of iron.  The land naturally abounds with game, immense
heaths and downs are paved with quails, grouse, and woodcock, and the
shores are animated by water birds.  The rivers and the surrounding
sea spawn with fish; there are salmon for the rich, and sprats and
herrings for the poor.  In the northern lochs, the herring are in
innumerable shoals; at one season, the country people say, the lakes
contain one part water and two parts fish.

        The only drawback on this industrial conveniency, is the
darkness of its sky.  The night and day are too nearly of a color.
It strains the eyes to read and to write.  Add the coal smoke.  In
the manufacturing towns, the fine soot or _blacks_ darken the day,
give white sheep the color of black sheep, discolor the human saliva,
contaminate the air, poison many plants, and corrode the monuments
and buildings.

        The London fog aggravates the distempers of the sky, and
sometimes justifies the epigram on the climate by an English wit, "in
a fine day, looking up a chimney; in a foul day, looking down one." A
gentleman in Liverpool told me that he found he could do without a
fire in his parlor about one day in the year.  It is however
pretended, that the enormous consumption of coal in the island is
also felt in modifying the general climate.

        Factitious climate, factitious position.  England resembles a ship in
its shape, and, if it were one, its best admiral could not have worked it, or
anchored it in a more judicious or effective position.  Sir John Herschel
said, "London was the centre of the terrene globe." The shopkeeping nation,
to use a shop word, has a _good stand._ The old Venetians pleased themselves
with the flattery, that Venice was in 45 degrees, midway between the poles
and the line; as if that were an imperial centrality.  Long of old, the
Greeks fancied Delphi the navel of the earth, in their favorite mode of
fabling the earth to be an animal.  The Jews believed Jerusalem to be the
centre.  I have seen a kratometric chart designed to show that the city of
Philadelphia was in the same thermic belt, and, by inference, in the same
belt of empire, as the cities of Athens, Rome, and London.  It was drawn by a
patriotic Philadelphian, and was examined with pleasure, under his showing,
by the inhabitants of Chestnut Street.  But, when carried to Charleston, to
New Orleans, and to Boston, it somehow failed to convince the ingenious
scholars of all those capitals.

        But England is anchored at the side of Europe, and right in the
heart of the modern world.  The sea, which, according to Virgil's
famous line, divided the poor Britons utterly from the world, proved
to be the ring of marriage with all nations.  It is not down in the
books, -- it is written only in the geologic strata, -- that
fortunate day when a wave of the German Ocean burst the old isthmus
which joined Kent and Cornwall to France, and gave to this fragment
of Europe its impregnable sea wall, cutting off an island of eight
hundred miles in length, with an irregular breadth reaching to three
hundred miles; a territory large enough for independence enriched
with every seed of national power, so near, that it can see the
harvests of the continent; and so far, that who would cross the
strait must be an expert mariner, ready for tempests.  As America,
Europe, and Asia lie, these Britons have precisely the best
commercial position in the whole planet, and are sure of a market for
all the goods they can manufacture.  And to make these advantages
avail, the River Thames must dig its spacious outlet to the sea from
the heart of the kingdom, giving road and landing to innumerable
ships, and all the conveniency to trade, that a people so skilful and
sufficient in economizing water-front by docks, warehouses, and
lighters required.  When James the First declared his purpose of
punishing London by removing his Court, the Lord Mayor replied,
"that, in removing his royal presence from his lieges, they hoped he
would leave them the Thames."

        In the variety of surface, Britain is a miniature of Europe,
having plain, forest, marsh, river, sea-shore; mines in Cornwall;
caves in Matlock and Derbyshire; delicious landscape in Dovedale,
delicious sea-view at Tor Bay, Highlands in Scotland, Snowdon in
Wales; and, in Westmoreland and Cumberland, a pocket Switzerland, in
which the lakes and mountains are on a sufficient scale to fill the
eye and touch the imagination.  It is a nation conveniently small.
Fontenelle thought, that nature had sometimes a little affectation;
and there is such an artificial completeness in this nation of
artificers, as if there were a design from the beginning to elaborate
a bigger Birmingham.  Nature held counsel with herself, and said, `My
Romans are gone.  To build my new empire, I will choose a rude race,
all masculine, with brutish strength.  I will not grudge a
competition of the roughest males.  Let buffalo gore buffalo, and the
pasture to the strongest!  For I have work that requires the best
will and sinew.  Sharp and temperate northern breezes shall blow, to
keep that will alive and alert.  The sea shall disjoin the people
from others, and knit them to a fierce nationality.  It shall give
them markets on every side.  Long time I will keep them on their
feet, by poverty, border-wars, seafaring, sea-risks, and the stimulus
of gain.  An island, -- but not so large, the people not so many as
to glut the great markets and depress one another, but proportioned
to the size of Europe and the continents.'

        With its fruits, and wares, and money, must its civil influence
radiate.  It is a singular coincidence to this geographic centrality,
the spiritual centrality, which Emanuel Swedenborg ascribes to the
people.  "For the English nation, the best of them are in the centre
of all Christians, because they have interior intellectual light.
This appears conspicuously in the spiritual world.  This light they
derive from the liberty of speaking and writing, and thereby of
thinking."

 
 
 
        Chapter IV _Race_

        An ingenious anatomist has written a book (*) to prove that
races are imperishable, but nations are pliant political
constructions, easily changed or destroyed.  But this writer did not
found his assumed races on any necessary law, disclosing their ideal
or metaphysical necessity; nor did he, on the other hand, count with
precision the existing races, and settle the true bounds; a point of
nicety, and the popular test of the theory.  The individuals at the
extremes of divergence in one race of men are as unlike as the wolf
to the lapdog.  Yet each variety shades down imperceptibly into the
next, and you cannot draw the line where a race begins or ends.
Hence every writer makes a different count.  Blumenbach reckons five
races; Humboldt three; and Mr. Pickering, who lately, in our
Exploring Expedition, thinks he saw all the kinds of men that can be
on the planet, makes eleven.

        (*) The Races, a Fragment.  By Robert Knox.  London: 1850.

        The British Empire is reckoned to contain 222,000,000 souls, --
perhaps a fifth of the population of the globe; and to comprise a
territory of 5,000,000 square miles.  So far have British people
predominated.  Perhaps forty of these millions are of British stock.
Add the United States of America, which reckon, exclusive of slaves,
20,000,000 of people, on a territory of 3,000,000 square miles, and
in which the foreign element, however considerable, is rapidly
assimilated, and you have a population of English descent and
language, of 60,000,000, and governing a population of 245,000,000
souls.

        The British census proper reckons twenty-seven and a half
millions in the home countries.  What makes this census important is
the quality of the units that compose it.  They are free forcible
men, in a country where life is safe, and has reached the greatest
value.  They give the bias to the current age; and that, not by
chance or by mass, but by their character, and by the number of
individuals among them of personal ability.  It has been denied that
the English have genius.  Be it as it may, men of vast intellect have
been born on their soil, and they have made or applied the principal
inventions.  They have sound bodies, and supreme endurance in war and
in labor.  The spawning force of the race has sufficed to the
colonization of great parts of the world; yet it remains to be seen
whether they can make good the exodus of millions from Great Britain,
amounting, in 1852, to more than a thousand a day.  They have
assimilating force, since they are imitated by their foreign
subjects; and they are still aggressive and propagandist, enlarging
the dominion of their arts and liberty.  Their laws are hospitable,
and slavery does not exist under them.  What oppression exists is
incidental and temporary; their success is not sudden or fortunate,
but they have maintained constancy and self-equality for many ages.

        Is this power due to their race, or to some other cause?  Men
hear gladly of the power of blood or race.  Every body likes to know
that his advantages cannot be attributed to air, soil, sea, or to
local wealth, as mines and quarries, nor to laws and traditions, nor
to fortune, but to superior brain, as it makes the praise more
personal to him.

        We anticipate in the doctrine of race something like that law
of physiology, that, whatever bone, muscle, or essential organ is
found in one healthy individual, the same part or organ may be found
in or near the same place in its congener; and we look to find in the
son every mental and moral property that existed in the ancestor.  In
race, it is not the broad shoulders, or litheness, or stature that
give advantage, but a symmetry that reaches as far as to the wit.
Then the miracle and renown begin.  Then first we care to examine the
pedigree, and copy heedfully the training, -- what food they ate,
what nursing, school, and exercises they had, which resulted in this
mother-wit, delicacy of thought, and robust wisdom.  How came such
men as King Alfred, and Roger Bacon, William of Wykeham, Walter
Raleigh, Philip Sidney, Isaac Newton, William Shakspeare, George
Chapman, Francis Bacon, George Herbert, Henry Vane, to exist here?
What made these delicate natures? was it the air? was it the sea? was
it the parentage?  For it is certain that these men are samples of
their contemporaries.  The hearing ear is always found close to the
speaking tongue; and no genius can long or often utter any thing
which is not invited and gladly entertained by men around him.

        It is race, is it not? that puts the hundred millions of India
under the dominion of a remote island in the north of Europe.  Race
avails much, if that be true, which is alleged, that all Celts are
Catholics, and all Saxons are Protestants; that Celts love unity of
power, and Saxons the representative principle.  Race is a
controlling influence in the Jew, who, for two millenniums, under
every climate, has preserved the same character and employments.
Race in the negro is of appalling importance.  The French in Canada,
cut off from all intercourse with the parent people, have held their
national traits.  I chanced to read Tacitus "on the Manners of the
Germans," not long since, in Missouri, and the heart of Illinois, and
I found abundant points of resemblance between the Germans of the
Hercynian forest, and our _Hoosiers_, _Suckers_, and _Badgers_ of the
American woods.

        But whilst race works immortally to keep its own, it is
resisted by other forces.  Civilization is a re-agent, and eats away
the old traits.  The Arabs of to-day are the Arabs of Pharaoh; but
the Briton of to-day is a very different person from Cassibelaunus or
Ossian.  Each religious sect has its physiognomy.  The Methodists
have acquired a face; the Quakers, a face; the nuns, a face.  An
Englishman will pick out a dissenter by his manners.  Trades and
professions carve their own lines on face and form.  Certain
circumstances of English life are not less effective; as, personal
liberty; plenty of food; good ale and mutton; open market, or good
wages for every kind of labor; high bribes to talent and skill; the
island life, or the million opportunities and outlets for expanding
and misplaced talent; readiness of combination among themselves for
politics or for business; strikes; and sense of superiority founded
on habit of victory in labor and in war; and the appetite for
superiority grows by feeding.

        It is easy to add to the counteracting forces to race.
Credence is a main element.  'Tis said, that the views of nature held
by any people determine all their institutions.  Whatever influences
add to mental or moral faculty, take men out of nationality, as out
of other conditions, and make the national life a culpable
compromise.

 
        These limitations of the formidable doctrine of race suggest
others which threaten to undermine it, as not sufficiently based.
The fixity or inconvertibleness of races as we see them, is a weak
argument for the eternity of these frail boundaries, since all our
historical period is a point to the duration in which nature has
wrought.  Any the least and solitariest fact in our natural history,
such as the melioration of fruits and of animal stocks, has the worth
of a _power_ in the opportunity of geologic periods.  Moreover,
though we flatter the self-love of men and nations by the legend of
pure races, all our experience is of the gradation and resolution of
races, and strange resemblances meet us every where.  It need not
puzzle us that Malay and Papuan, Celt and Roman, Saxon and Tartar
should mix, when we see the rudiments of tiger and baboon in our
human form, and know that the barriers of races are not so firm, but
that some spray sprinkles us from the antediluvian seas.

        The low organizations are simplest; a mere mouth, a jelly, or a
straight worm.  As the scale mounts, the organizations become
complex.  We are piqued with pure descent, but nature loves
inoculation.  A child blends in his face the faces of both parents,
and some feature from every ancestor whose face hangs on the wall.
The best nations are those most widely related; and navigation, as
effecting a world-wide mixture, is the most potent advancer of
nations.

        The English composite character betrays a mixed origin.  Every
thing English is a fusion of distant and antagonistic elements.  The
language is mixed; the names of men are of different nations, --
three languages, three or four nations; -- the currents of thought
are counter: contemplation and practical skill; active intellect and
dead conservatism; world-wide enterprise, and devoted use and wont;
aggressive freedom and hospitable law, with bitter class-legislation;
a people scattered by their wars and affairs over the face of the
whole earth, and homesick to a man; a country of extremes, -- dukes
and chartists, Bishops of Durham and naked heathen colliers; --
nothing can be praised in it without damning exceptions, and nothing
denounced without salvos of cordial praise.

        Neither do this people appear to be of one stem; but
collectively a better race than any from which they are derived.  Nor
is it easy to trace it home to its original seats.  Who can call by
right names what races are in Britain?  Who can trace them
historically?  Who can discriminate them anatomically, or
metaphysically?

        In the impossibility of arriving at satisfaction on the
historical question of race, and, -- come of whatever disputable
ancestry, -- the indisputable Englishman before me, himself very well
marked, and nowhere else to be found, -- I fancied I could leave
quite aside the choice of a tribe as his lineal progenitors.  Defoe
said in his wrath, "the Englishman was the mud of all races." I
incline to the belief, that, as water, lime, and sand make mortar, so
certain temperaments marry well, and, by well-managed contrarieties,
develop as drastic a character as the English.  On the whole, it is
not so much a history of one or of certain tribes of Saxons, Jutes,
or Frisians, coming from one place, and genetically identical, as it
is an anthology of temperaments out of them all.  Certain
temperaments suit the sky and soil of England, say eight or ten or
twenty varieties, as, out of a hundred pear-trees, eight or ten suit
the soil of an orchard, and thrive, whilst all the unadapted
temperaments die out.

        The English derive their pedigree from such a range of
nationalities, that there needs sea-room and land-room to unfold the
varieties of talent and character.  Perhaps the ocean serves as a
galvanic battery to distribute acids at one pole, and alkalies at the
other.  So England tends to accumulate her liberals in America, and
her conservatives at London.  The Scandinavians in her race still
hear in every age the murmurs of their mother, the ocean; the Briton
in the blood hugs the homestead still.

        Again, as if to intensate the influences that are not of race,
what we think of when we talk of English traits really narrows itself
to a small district.  It excludes Ireland, and Scotland, and Wales,
and reduces itself at last to London, that is, to those who come and
go thither.  The portraits that hang on the walls in the Academy
Exhibition at London, the figures in Punch's drawings of the public
men, or of the club-houses, the prints in the shop-windows, are
distinctive English, and not American, no, nor Scotch, nor Irish: but
'tis a very restricted nationality.  As you go north into the
manufacturing and agricultural districts, and to the population that
never travels, as you go into Yorkshire, as you enter Scotland, the
world's Englishman is no longer found.  In Scotland, there is a rapid
loss of all grandeur of mien and manners; a provincial eagerness and
acuteness appear; the poverty of the country makes itself remarked,
and a coarseness of manners; and, among the intellectual, is the
insanity of dialectics.  In Ireland, are the same climate and soil as
in England, but less food, no right relation to the land, political
dependence, small tenantry, and an inferior or misplaced race.

        These queries concerning ancestry and blood may be well
allowed, for there is no prosperity that seems more to depend on the
kind of man than British prosperity.  Only a hardy and wise people
could have made this small territory great.  We say, in a regatta or
yacht-race, that if the boats are anywhere nearly matched, it is the
man that wins.  Put the best sailing master into either boat, and he
will win.

        Yet it is fine for us to speculate in face of unbroken
traditions, though vague, and losing themselves in fable.  The
traditions have got footing, and refuse to be disturbed.  The
kitchen-clock is more convenient than sidereal time.  We must use the
popular category, as we do by the Linnaean classification, for
convenience, and not as exact and final.  Otherwise, we are presently
confounded, when the best settled traits of one race are claimed by
some new ethnologist as precisely characteristic of the rival tribe.

        I found plenty of well-marked English types, the ruddy
complexion fair and plump, robust men, with faces cut like a die, and
a strong island speech and accent; a Norman type, with the
complacency that belongs to that constitution.  Others, who might be
Americans, for any thing that appeared in their complexion or form:
and their speech was much less marked, and their thought much less
bound.  We will call them Saxons.  Then the Roman has implanted his
dark complexion in the trinity or quaternity of bloods.

        1. The sources from which tradition derives their stock are
mainly three.  And, first, they are of the oldest blood of the world,
-- the Celtic.  Some peoples are deciduous or transitory.  Where are
the Greeks? where the Etrurians? where the Romans?  But the Celts or
Sidonides are an old family, of whose beginning there is no memory,
and their end is likely to be still more remote in the future; for
they have endurance and productiveness.  They planted Britain, and
gave to the seas and mountains names which are poems, and imitate the
pure voices of nature.  They are favorably remembered in the oldest
records of Europe.  They had no violent feudal tenure, but the
husbandman owned the land.  They had an alphabet, astronomy, priestly
culture, and a sublime creed.  They have a hidden and precarious
genius.  They made the best popular literature of the middle ages in
the songs of Merlin, and the tender and delicious mythology of
Arthur.

        2. The English come mainly from the Germans, whom the Romans
found hard to conquer in two hundred and ten years, -- say,
impossible to conquer, -- when one remembers the long sequel; a
people about whom, in the old empire, the rumor ran, there was never
any that meddled with them that repented it not.

        3. Charlemagne, halting one day in a town of Narbonnese Gaul,
looked out of a window, and saw a fleet of Northmen cruising in the
Mediterranean.  They even entered the port of the town where he was,
causing no small alarm and sudden manning and arming of his galleys.
As they put out to sea again, the emperor gazed long after them, his
eyes bathed in tears.  "I am tormented with sorrow," he said, "when I
foresee the evils they will bring on my posterity." There was reason
for these Xerxes' tears.  The men who have built a ship and invented
the rig, -- cordage, sail, compass, and pump, -- the working in and
out of port, have acquired much more than a ship.  Now arm them, and
every shore is at their mercy.  For, if they have not numerical
superiority where they anchor, they have only to sail a mile or two
to find it.  Bonaparte's art of war, namely of concentrating force on
the point of attack, must always be theirs who have the choice of the
battle-ground.  Of course they come into the fight from a higher
ground of power than the land-nations; and can engage them on shore
with a victorious advantage in the retreat.  As soon as the shores
are sufficiently peopled to make piracy a losing business, the same
skill and courage are ready for the service of trade.

        The _Heimskringla_, or Sagas of the Kings of Norway, collected
by Snorro Sturleson, is the Iliad and Odyssey of English history.
Its portraits, like Homer's, are strongly individualized.  The Sagas
describe a monarchical republic like Sparta.  The government
disappears before the importance of citizens.  In Norway, no Persian
masses fight and perish to aggrandize a king, but the actors are
bonders or landholders, every one of whom is named and personally and
patronymically described, as the king's friend and companion.  A
sparse population gives this high worth to every man.  Individuals
are often noticed as very handsome persons, which trait only brings
the story nearer to the English race.  Then the solid material
interest predominates, so dear to English understanding, wherein the
association is logical, between merit and land.  The heroes of the
Sagas are not the knights of South Europe.  No vaporing of France and
Spain has corrupted them.  They are substantial farmers, whom the
rough times have forced to defend their properties.  They have
weapons which they use in a determined manner, by no means for
chivalry, but for their acres.  They are people considerably advanced
in rural arts, living amphibiously on a rough coast, and drawing half
their food from the sea, and half from the land.  They have herds of
cows, and malt, wheat, bacon, butter, and cheese.  They fish in the
fiord, and hunt the deer.  A king among these farmers has a varying
power, sometimes not exceeding the authority of a sheriff.  A king
was maintained much as, in some of our country districts, a
winter-schoolmaster is quartered, a week here, a week there, and a
fortnight on the next farm, -- on all the farmers in rotation.  This
the king calls going into guest-quarters; and it was the only way in
which, in a poor country, a poor king, with many retainers, could be
kept alive, when he leaves his own farm to collect his dues through
the kingdom.

        These Norsemen are excellent persons in the main, with good
sense, steadiness, wise speech, and prompt action.  But they have a
singular turn for homicide; their chief end of man is to murder, or
to be murdered; oars, scythes, harpoons, crowbars, peatknives, and
hayforks, are tools valued by them all the more for their charming
aptitude for assassinations.  A pair of kings, after dinner, will
divert themselves by thrusting each his sword through the other's
body, as did Yngve and Alf.  Another pair ride out on a morning for a
frolic, and, finding no weapon near, will take the bits out of their
horses' mouths, and crush each other's heads with them, as did Alric
and Eric.  The sight of a tent-cord or a cloak-string puts them on
hanging somebody, a wife, or a husband, or, best of all, a king.  If
a farmer has so much as a hayfork, he sticks it into a King Dag.
King Ingiald finds it vastly amusing to burn up half a dozen kings in
a hall, after getting them drunk.  Never was poor gentleman so
surfeited with life, so furious to be rid of it, as the Northman.  If
he cannot pick any other quarrel, he will get himself comfortably
gored by a bull's horns, like Egil, or slain by a land-slide, like
the agricultural King Onund.  Odin died in his bed, in Sweden; but it
was a proverb of ill condition, to die the death of old age.  King
Hake of Sweden cuts and slashes in battle, as long as he can stand,
then orders his war-ship, loaded with his dead men and their weapons,
to be taken out to sea, the tiller shipped, and the sails spread;
being left alone, he sets fire to some tar-wood, and lies down
contented on deck.  The wind blew off the land, the ship flew burning
in clear flame, out between the islets into the ocean, and there was
the right end of King Hake.

        The early Sagas are sanguinary and piratical; the later are of
a noble strain.  History rarely yields us better passages than the
conversation between King Sigurd the Crusader, and King Eystein, his
brother, on their respective merits, -- one, the soldier, and the
other, a lover of the arts of peace.

        But the reader of the Norman history must steel himself by
holding fast the remote compensations which result from animal vigor.
As the old fossil world shows that the first steps of reducing the
chaos were confided to saurians and other huge and horrible animals,
so the foundations of the new civility were to be laid by the most
savage men.

        The Normans came out of France into England worse men than they
went into it, one hundred and sixty years before.  They had lost
their own language, and learned the Romance or barbarous Latin of the
Gauls; and had acquired, with the language, all the vices it had
names for.  The conquest has obtained in the chronicles, the name of
the "memory of sorrow." Twenty thousand thieves landed at Hastings.
These founders of the House of Lords were greedy and ferocious
dragoons, sons of greedy and ferocious pirates.  They were all alike,
they took every thing they could carry, they burned, harried,
violated, tortured, and killed, until every thing English was brought
to the verge of ruin.  Such, however, is the illusion of antiquity
and wealth, that decent and dignified men now existing boast their
descent from these filthy thieves, who showed a far juster conviction
of their own merits, by assuming for their types the swine, goat,
jackal, leopard, wolf, and snake, which they severally resembled.

        England yielded to the Danes and Northmen in the tenth and
eleventh centuries, and was the receptacle into which all the mettle
of that strenuous population was poured.  The continued draught of
the best men in Norway, Sweden, and Denmark, to these piratical
expeditions, exhausted those countries, like a tree which bears much
fruit when young, and these have been second-rate powers ever since.
The power of the race migrated, and left Norway void.  King Olaf
said, "When King Harold, my father, went westward to England, the
chosen men in Norway followed him: but Norway was so emptied then,
that such men have not since been to find in the country, nor
especially such a leader as King Harold was for wisdom and bravery."

        It was a tardy recoil of these invasions, when, in 1801, the
British government sent Nelson to bombard the Danish forts in the
Sound; and, in 1807, Lord Cathcart, at Copenhagen, took the entire
Danish fleet, as it lay in the basins, and all the equipments from
the Arsenal, and carried them to England.  Konghelle, the town where
the kings of Norway, Sweden, and Denmark were wont to meet, is now
rented to a private English gentleman for a hunting ground.

        It took many generations to trim, and comb, and perfume the
first boat-load of Norse pirates into royal highnesses and most noble
Knights of the Garter: but every sparkle of ornament dates back to
the Norse boat.  There will be time enough to mellow this strength
into civility and religion.  It is a medical fact, that the children
of the blind see; the children of felons have a healthy conscience.
Many a mean, dastardly boy is, at the age of puberty, transformed
into a serious and generous youth.

        The mildness of the following ages has not quite effaced these
traits of Odin; as the rudiment of a structure matured in the tiger
is said to be still found unabsorbed in the Caucasian man.  The
nation has a tough, acrid, animal nature, which centuries of
churching and civilizing have not been able to sweeten.  Alfieri
said, "the crimes of Italy were the proof of the superiority of the
stock;" and one may say of England, that this watch moves on a
splinter of adamant.  The English uncultured are a brutal nation.
The crimes recorded in their calendars leave nothing to be desired in
the way of cold malignity.  Dear to the English heart is a fair
stand-up fight.  The brutality of the manners in the lower class
appears in the boxing, bear-baiting, cock-fighting, love of
executions, and in the readiness for a set-to in the streets,
delightful to the English of all classes.  The costermongers of
London streets hold cowardice in loathing: -- "we must work our fists
well; we are all handy with our fists." The public schools are
charged with being bear-gardens of brutal strength, and are liked by
the people for that cause.  The fagging is a trait of the same
quality.  Medwin, in the Life of Shelley, relates, that, at a
military school, they rolled up a young man in a snowball, and left
him so in his room, while the other cadets went to church; -- and
crippled him for life.  They have retained impressment,
deck-flogging, army-flogging, and school-flogging.  Such is the
ferocity of the army discipline, that a soldier sentenced to
flogging, sometimes prays that his sentence may be commuted to death.
Flogging banished from the armies of Western Europe, remains here by
the sanction of the Duke of Wellington.  The right of the husband to
sell the wife has been retained down to our times.  The Jews have
been the favorite victims of royal and popular persecution.  Henry
III.  mortgaged all the Jews in the kingdom to his brother, the Earl
of Cornwall, as security for money which he borrowed.  The torture of
criminals, and the rack for extorting evidence, were slowly disused.
Of the criminal statutes, Sir Samuel Romilly said, "I have examined
the codes of all nations, and ours is the worst, and worthy of the
Anthropophagi." In the last session, the House of Commons was
listening to details of flogging and torture practised in the jails.

        As soon as this land, thus geographically posted, got a hardy
people into it, they could not help becoming the sailors and factors
of the globe.  From childhood, they dabbled in water, they swum like
fishes, their playthings were boats.  In the case of the ship-money,
the judges delivered it for law, that "England being an island, the
very midland shires therein are all to be accounted maritime:" and
Fuller adds, "the genius even of landlocked counties driving the
natives with a maritime dexterity." As early as the conquest, it is
remarked in explanation of the wealth of England, that its merchants
trade to all countries.

        The English, at the present day, have great vigor of body and
endurance.  Other countrymen look slight and undersized beside them,
and invalids.  They are bigger men than the Americans.  I suppose a
hundred English taken at random out of the street, would weigh a
fourth more, than so many Americans.  Yet, I am told, the skeleton is
not larger.  They are round, ruddy, and handsome; at least, the whole
bust is well formed; and there is a tendency to stout and powerful
frames.  I remarked the stoutness, on my first landing at Liverpool;
porter, drayman, coachman, guard, -- what substantial, respectable,
grandfatherly figures, with costume and manners to suit.  The
American has arrived at the old mansion-house, and finds himself
among uncles, aunts, and grandsires.  The pictures on the
chimney-tiles of his nursery were pictures of these people.  Here
they are in the identical costumes and air, which so took him.

        It is the fault of their forms that they grow stocky, and the
women have that disadvantage, -- few tall, slender figures of flowing
shape, but stunted and thickset persons.  The French say, that the
Englishwomen have two left hands.  But, in all ages, they are a
handsome race.  The bronze monuments of crusaders lying cross-legged,
in the Temple Church at London, and those in Worcester and in
Salisbury Cathedrals, which are seven hundred years old, are of the
same type as the best youthful heads of men now in England; -- please
by beauty of the same character, an expression blending good-nature,
valor, and refinement, and, mainly, by that uncorrupt youth in the
face of manhood, which is daily seen in the streets of London.

        Both branches of the Scandinavian race are distinguished for
beauty.  The anecdote of the handsome captives which Saint Gregory
found at Rome, A. D. 600, is matched by the testimony of the Norman
chroniclers, five centuries later, who wondered at the beauty and
long flowing hair of the young English captives.  Meantime, the
Heimskringla has frequent occasion to speak of the personal beauty of
its heroes.  When it is considered what humanity, what resources of
mental and moral power, the traits of the blonde race betoken, -- its
accession to empire marks a new and finer epoch, wherein the old
mineral force shall be subjugated at last by humanity, and shall
plough in its furrow henceforward.  It is not a final race, once a
crab always crab, but a race with a future.

        On the English face are combined decision and nerve, with the
fair complexion, blue eyes, and open and florid aspect.  Hence the
love of truth, hence the sensibility, the fine perception, and poetic
construction.  The fair Saxon man, with open front, and honest
meaning, domestic, affectionate, is not the wood out of which
cannibal, or inquisitor, or assassin is made, but he is moulded for
law, lawful trade, civility, marriage, the nurture of children, for
colleges, churches, charities, and colonies.

        They are rather manly than warlike.  When the war is over, the
mask falls from the affectionate and domestic tastes, which make them
women in kindness.  This union of qualities is fabled in their
national legend of _Beauty and the Beast_, or, long before, in the
Greek legend of _Hermaphrodite_.  The two sexes are co-present in the
English mind.  I apply to Britannia, queen of seas and colonies, the
words in which her latest novelist portrays his heroine: "she is as
mild as she is game, and as game as she is mild." The English delight
in the antagonism which combines in one person the extremes of
courage and tenderness.  Nelson, dying at Trafalgar, sends his love
to Lord Collingwood, and, like an innocent schoolboy that goes to
bed, says, "Kiss me, Hardy," and turns to sleep.  Lord Collingwood,
his comrade, was of a nature the most affectionate and domestic.
Admiral Rodney's figure approached to delicacy and effeminacy, and he
declared himself very sensible to fear, which he surmounted only by
considerations of honor and public duty.  Clarendon says, the Duke of
Buckingham was so modest and gentle, that some courtiers attempted to
put affronts on him, until they found that this modesty and
effeminacy was only a mask for the most terrible determination.  And
Sir James Parry said, the other day, of Sir John Franklin, that, "if
he found Wellington Sound open, he explored it; for he was a man who
never turned his back on a danger, yet of that tenderness, that he
would not brush away a mosquito."  Even for their highwaymen the same
virtue is claimed, and Robin Hood comes described to us as
_mitissimus praedonum_, the gentlest thief.  But they know where
their war-dogs lie.  Cromwell, Blake, Marlborough, Chatham, Nelson,
and Wellington, are not to be trifled with, and the brutal strength
which lies at the bottom of society, the animal ferocity of the quays
and cockpits, the bullies of the coster-mongers of Shoreditch, Seven
Dials, and Spitalfields, they know how to wake up.

        They have a vigorous health, and last well into middle and old
age.  The old men are as red as roses, and still handsome.  A clear
skin, a peach-bloom complexion, and good teeth, are found all over
the island.  They use a plentiful and nutritious diet.  The operative
cannot subsist on watercresses.  Beef, mutton, wheatbread, and
malt-liquors, are universal among the first-class laborers.  Good
feeding is a chief point of national pride among the vulgar, and, in
their caricatures, they represent the Frenchman as a poor, starved
body.  It is curious that Tacitus found the English beer already in
use among the Germans: "they make from barley or wheat a drink
corrupted into some resemblance to wine." Lord Chief Justice
Fortescue in Henry VI.'s time, says, "The inhabitants of England
drink no water, unless at certain times, on a religious score, and by
way of penance." The extremes of poverty and ascetic penance, it
would seem, never reach cold water in England.  Wood, the antiquary,
in describing the poverty and maceration of Father Lacey, an English
Jesuit, does not deny him beer.  He says, "his bed was under a
thatching, and the way to it up a ladder; his fare was coarse; his
drink, of a penny a gawn, or gallon."

 
        They have more constitutional energy than any other people.
They think, with Henri Quatre, that manly exercises are the
foundation of that elevation of mind which gives one nature ascendant
over another; or, with the Arabs, that the days spent in the chase
are not counted in the length of life.  They box, run, shoot, ride,
row, and sail from pole to pole.  They eat, and drink, and live jolly
in the open air, putting a bar of solid sleep between day and day.
They walk and ride as fast as they can, their head bent forward, as
if urged on some pressing affair.  The French say, that Englishmen in
the street always walk straight before them like mad dogs.  Men and
women walk with infatuation.  As soon as he can handle a gun, hunting
is the fine art of every Englishman of condition.  They are the most
voracious people of prey that ever existed.  Every season turns out
the aristocracy into the country, to shoot and fish.  The more
vigorous run out of the island to Europe, to America, to Asia, to
Africa, and Australia, to hunt with fury by gun, by trap, by harpoon,
by lasso, with dog, with horse, with elephant, or with dromedary, all
the game that is in nature.  These men have written the game-books of
all countries, as Hawker, Scrope, Murray, Herbert, Maxwell, Cumming,
and a host of travellers.  The people at home are addicted to boxing,
running, leaping, and rowing matches.

        I suppose, the dogs and horses must be thanked for the fact,
that the men have muscles almost as tough and supple as their own.
If in every efficient man, there is first a fine animal, in the
English race it is of the best breed, a wealthy, juicy, broad-chested
creature, steeped in ale and good cheer, and a little overloaded by
his flesh.  Men of animal nature rely, like animals, on their
instincts.  The Englishman associates well with dogs and horses.  His
attachment to the horse arises from the courage and address required
to manage it.  The horse finds out who is afraid of it, and does not
disguise its opinion.  Their young boiling clerks and lusty
collegians like the company of horses better than the company of
professors.  I suppose, the horses are better company for them.  The
horse has more uses than Buffon noted.  If you go into the streets,
every driver in bus or dray is a bully, and, if I wanted a good troop
of soldiers, I should recruit among the stables.  Add a certain
degree of refinement to the vivacity of these riders, and you obtain
the precise quality which makes the men and women of polite society
formidable.

        They come honestly by their horsemanship, with _Hengst_ and
_Horsa_ for their Saxon founders.  The other branch of their race had
been Tartar nomads.  The horse was all their wealth.  The children
were fed on mares' milk.  The pastures of Tartary were still
remembered by the tenacious practice of the Norsemen to eat
horseflesh at religious feasts.  In the Danish invasions, the
marauders seized upon horses where they landed, and were at once
converted into a body of expert cavalry.

        At one time, this skill seems to have declined.  Two centuries
ago, the English horse never performed any eminent service beyond the
seas; and the reason assigned, was, that the genius of the English
hath always more inclined them to foot-service, as pure and proper
manhood, without any mixture; whilst, in a victory on horseback, the
credit ought to be divided betwixt the man and his horse.  But in two
hundred years, a change has taken place.  Now, they boast that they
understand horses better than any other people in the world, and that
their horses are become their second selves.

        "William the Conqueror being," says Camden, "better affected to
beasts than to men, imposed heavy fines and punishments on those that
should meddle with his game." The Saxon Chronicle says, "he loved the
tall deer as if he were their father." And rich Englishmen have
followed his example, according to their ability, ever since, in
encroaching on the tillage and commons with their game-preserves.  It
is a proverb in England, that it is safer to shoot a man, than a
hare.  The severity of the game-laws certainly indicates an
extravagant sympathy of the nation with horses and hunters.  The
gentlemen are always on horseback, and have brought horses to an
ideal perfection, -- the English racer is a factitious breed.  A
score or two of mounted gentlemen may frequently be seen running like
centaurs down a hill nearly as steep as the roof of a house.  Every
inn-room is lined with pictures of races; telegraphs communicate,
every hour, tidings of the heats from Newmarket and Ascot: and the
House of Commons adjourns over the `Derby Day.'

 
 
        Chapter V _Ability_

        The saxon and the Northman are both Scandinavians.  History
does not allow us to fix the limits of the application of these names
with any accuracy; but from the residence of a portion of these
people in France, and from some effect of that powerful soil on their
blood and manners, the Norman has come popularly to represent in
England the aristocratic, -- and the Saxon the democratic principle.
And though, I doubt not, the nobles are of both tribes, and the
workers of both, yet we are forced to use the names a little
mythically, one to represent the worker, and the other the enjoyer.

        The island was a prize for the best race.  Each of the dominant
races tried its fortune in turn.  The Ph;oenician, the Celt, and the
Goth, had already got in.  The Roman came, but in the very day when
his fortune culminated.  He looked in the eyes of a new people that
was to supplant his own.  He disembarked his legions, erected his
camps and towers, -- presently he heard bad news from Italy, and
worse and worse, every year; at last, he made a handsome compliment
of roads and walls, and departed.  But the Saxon seriously settled in
the land, builded, tilled, fished, and traded, with German truth and
adhesiveness.  The Dane came, and divided with him.  Last of all, the
Norman, or French-Dane, arrived, and formally conquered, harried and
ruled the kingdom.  A century later, it came out, that the Saxon had
the most bottom and longevity, had managed to make the victor speak
the language and accept the law and usage of the victim; forced the
baron to dictate Saxon terms to Norman kings; and, step by step, got
all the essential securities of civil liberty invented and confirmed.
The genius of the race and the genius of the place conspired to this
effect.  The island is lucrative to free labor, but not worth
possession on other terms.  The race was so intellectual, that a
feudal or military tenure could not last longer than the war.  The
power of the Saxon-Danes, so thoroughly beaten in the war, that the
name of English and villein were synonymous, yet so vivacious as to
extort charters from the kings, stood on the strong personality of
these people.  Sense and economy must rule in a world which is made
of sense and economy, and the banker, with his seven _per cent_,
drives the earl out of his castle.  A nobility of soldiers cannot
keep down a commonalty of shrewd scientific persons.  What signifies
a pedigree of a hundred links, against a cotton-spinner with steam in
his mill; or, against a company of broad-shouldered Liverpool
merchants, for whom Stephenson and Brunel are contriving locomotives
and a tubular bridge?

        These Saxons are the hands of mankind.  They have the taste for
toil, a distaste for pleasure or repose, and the telescopic
appreciation of distant gain.  They are the wealth-makers, -- and by
dint of mental faculty, which has its own conditions.  The Saxon
works after liking, or, only for himself; and to set him at work, and
to begin to draw his monstrous values out of barren Britain, all
dishonor, fret, and barrier must be removed, and then his energies
begin to play.

        The Scandinavian fancied himself surrounded by Trolls, -- a
kind of goblin men, with vast power of work and skilful production,
-- divine stevedores, carpenters, reapers, smiths, and masons, swift
to reward every kindness done them, with gifts of gold and silver.
In all English history, this dream comes to pass.  Certain Trolls or
working brains, under the names of Alfred, Bede, Caxton, Bracton,
Camden, Drake, Selden, Dugdale, Newton, Gibbon, Brindley, Watt,
Wedgwood, dwell in the troll-mounts of Britain, and turn the sweat of
their face to power and renown.

        If the race is good, so is the place.  Nobody landed on this
spellbound island with impunity.  The enchantments of barren shingle
and rough weather, transformed every adventurer into a laborer.  Each
vagabond that arrived bent his neck to the yoke of gain, or found the
air too tense for him.  The strong survived, the weaker went to the
ground.  Even the pleasure-hunters and sots of England are of a
tougher texture.  A hard temperament had been formed by Saxon and
Saxon-Dane, and such of these French or Normans as could reach it,
were naturalized in every sense.

        All the admirable expedients or means hit upon in England must
be looked at as growths or irresistible offshoots of the expanding
mind of the race.  A man of that brain thinks and acts thus; and his
neighbor, being afflicted with the same kind of brain, though he is
rich, and called a baron, or a duke, thinks the same thing, and is
ready to allow the justice of the thought and act in his retainer or
tenant, though sorely against his baronial or ducal will.

        The island was renowned in antiquity for its breed of mastiffs,
so fierce, that, when their teeth were set, you must cut their heads
off to part them.  The man was like his dog.  The people have that
nervous bilious temperament, which is known by medical men to resist
every means employed to make its possessor subservient to the will of
others.  The English game is main force to main force, the planting
of foot to foot, fair play and open field, -- a rough tug without
trick or dodging, till one or both come to pieces.  King Ethelwald
spoke the language of his race, when he planted himself at Wimborne,
and said, `he would do one of two things, or there live, or there
lie.' They hate craft and subtlety.  They neither poison, nor waylay,
nor assassinate; and, when they have pounded each other to a
poultice, they will shake hands and be friends for the remainder of
their lives.

        You shall trace these Gothic touches at school, at country
fairs, at the hustings, and in parliament.  No artifice, no breach of
truth and plain dealing, -- not so much as secret ballot, is suffered
in the island.  In parliament, the tactics of the opposition is to
resist every step of the government, by a pitiless attack: and in a
bargain, no prospect of advantage is so dear to the merchant, as the
thought of being tricked is mortifying.

        Sir Kenelm Digby, a courtier of Charles and James, who won the
sea-fight of Scanderoon, was a model Englishman in his day.  "His
person was handsome and gigantic, he had so graceful elocution and
noble address, that, had he been dropt out of the clouds in any part
of the world, he would have made himself respected: he was skilled in
six tongues, and master of arts and arms." (* 1) Sir Kenelm wrote a
book, "Of Bodies and of Souls," in which he propounds, that
"syllogisms do breed or rather are all the variety of man's life.
They are the steps by which we walk in all our businesses.  Man, as
he is man, doth nothing else but weave such chains.  Whatsoever he
doth, swarving from this work, he doth as deficient from the nature
of man: and, if he do aught beyond this, by breaking out into divers
sorts of exterior actions, he findeth, nevertheless, in this linked
sequel of simple discourses, the art, the cause, the rule, the
bounds, and the model of it." (* 2)

        There spoke the genius of the English people.  There is a
necessity on them to be logical.  They would hardly greet the good
that did not logically fall, -- as if it excluded their own merit, or
shook their understandings.  They are jealous of minds that have much
facility of association, from an instinctive fear that the seeing
many relations to their thought might impair this serial continuity
and lucrative concentration.  They are impatient of genius, or of
minds addicted to contemplation, and cannot conceal their contempt
for sallies of thought, however lawful, whose steps they cannot count
by their wonted rule.  Neither do they reckon better a syllogism that
ends in syllogism.  For they have a supreme eye to facts, and theirs
is a logic that brings salt to soup, hammer to nail, oar to boat, the
logic of cooks, carpenters, and chemists, following the sequence of
nature, and one on which words make no impression.  Their mind is not
dazzled by its own means, but locked and bolted to results.  They
love men, who, like Samuel Johnson, a doctor in the schools, would
jump out of his syllogism the instant his major proposition was in
danger, to save that, at all hazards.  Their practical vision is
spacious, and they can hold many threads without entangling them.
All the steps they orderly take; but with the high logic of never
confounding the minor and major proposition; keeping their eye on
their aim, in all the complicity and delay incident to the several
series of means they employ.  There is room in their minds for this
vand that, -- a science of degrees.  In the courts, the independence
of the judges and the loyalty of the suitors are equally excellent.
In Parliament, they have hit on that capital invention of freedom, a
constitutional opposition.  And when courts and parliament are both
deaf, the plaintiff is not silenced.  Calm, patient, his weapon of
defence from year to year is the obstinate reproduction of the
grievance, with calculations and estimates.  But, meantime, he is
drawing numbers and money to his opinion, resolved that if all remedy
fails, right of revolution is at the bottom of his charter-box.  They
are bound to see their measure carried, and stick to it through ages
of defeat.

        Into this English logic, however, an infusion of justice
enters, not so apparent in other races, -- a belief in the existence
of two sides, and the resolution to see fair play.  There is on every
question, an appeal from the assertion of the parties, to the proof
of what is asserted.  They are impious in their scepticism of a
theory, but kiss the dust before a fact.  Is it a machine, is it a
charter, is it a boxer in the ring, is it a candidate on the
hustings, -- the universe of Englishmen will suspend their judgment,
until the trial can be had.  They are not to be led by a phrase, they
want a working plan, a working machine, a working constitution, and
will sit out the trial, and abide by the issue, and reject all
preconceived theories.  In politics they put blunt questions, which
must be answered; who is to pay the taxes? what will you do for
trade? what for corn? what for the spinner?

        This singular fairness and its results strike the French with
surprise.  Philip de Commines says, "Now, in my opinion, among all
the sovereignties I know in the world, that in which the public good
is best attended to, and the least violence exercised on the people,
is that of England." Life is safe, and personal rights; and what is
freedom, without security? whilst, in France, `fraternity,'
`equality,' and `indivisible unity,' are names for assassination.
Montesquieu said, "England is the freest country in the world.  If a
man in England had as many enemies as hairs on his head, no harm
would happen to him."

        Their self-respect, their faith in causation, and their
realistic logic or coupling of means to ends, have given them the
leadership of the modern world.  Montesquieu said, "No people have
true common sense but those who are born in England." This common
sense is a perception of all the conditions of our earthly existence,
of laws that can be stated, and of laws that cannot be stated, or
that are learned only by practice, in which allowance for friction is
made.  They are impious in their scepticism of theory, and in high
departments they are cramped and sterile.  But the unconditional
surrender to facts, and the choice of means to reach their ends, are
as admirable as with ants and bees.

        The bias of the nation is a passion for utility.  They love the
lever, the screw, and pulley, the Flanders draught-horse, the
waterfall, wind-mills, tide-mills; the sea and the wind to bear their
freight ships.  More than the diamond Koh-i-noor, which glitters
among their crown jewels, they prize that dull pebble which is wiser
than a man, whose poles turn themselves to the poles of the world,
and whose axis is parallel to the axis of the world.  Now, their toys
are steam and galvanism.  They are heavy at the fine arts, but adroit
at the coarse; not good in jewelry or mosaics, but the best
iron-masters, colliers, wool-combers, and tanners, in Europe.  They
apply themselves to agriculture, to draining, to resisting
encroachments of sea, wind, travelling sands, cold and wet sub-soil;
to fishery, to manufacture of indispensable staples, -- salt,
plumbago, leather, wool, glass, pottery, and brick, -- to bees and
silkworms; -- and by their steady combinations they succeed.  A
manufacturer sits down to dinner in a suit of clothes which was wool
on a sheep's back at sunrise.  You dine with a gentleman on venison,
pheasant, quail, pigeons, poultry, mushrooms, and pine-apples, all
the growth of his estate.  They are neat husbands for ordering all
their tools pertaining to house and field.  All are well kept.  There
is no want and no waste.  They study use and fitness in their
building, in the order of their dwellings, and in their dress.  The
Frenchman invented the ruffle, the Englishman added the shirt.  The
Englishman wears a sensible coat buttoned to the chin, of rough but
solid and lasting texture.  If he is a lord, he dresses a little
worse than a commoner.  They have diffused the taste for plain
substantial hats, shoes, and coats through Europe.  They think him
the best dressed man, whose dress is so fit for his use that you
cannot notice or remember to describe it.

        They secure the essentials in their diet, in their arts, and
manufactures.  Every article of cutlery shows, in its shape, thought
and long experience of workmen.  They put the expense in the right
place, as, in their sea-steamers, in the solidity of the machinery
and the strength of the boat.  The admirable equipment of their
arctic ships carries London to the pole.  They build roads,
aqueducts, warm and ventilate houses.  And they have impressed their
directness and practical habit on modern civilization.

        In trade, the Englishman believes that nobody breaks who ought
not to break; and, that, if he do not make trade every thing, it will
make him nothing; and acts on this belief.  The spirit of system,
attention to details, and the subordination of details, or, the not
driving things too finely, (which is charged on the Germans,)
constitute that despatch of business, which makes the mercantile
power of England.

        In war, the Englishman looks to his means.  He is of the
opinion of Civilis, his German ancestor, whom Tacitus reports as
holding "that the gods are on the side of the strongest;"---a
sentence which Bonaparte unconsciously translated, when he said,
"that he had noticed, that Providence always favored the heaviest
battalion." Their military science propounds that if the weight of
the advancing column is greater than that of the resisting, the
latter is destroyed.  Therefore Wellington, when he came to the army
in Spain, had every man weighed, first with accoutrements, and then
without; believing that the force of an army depended on the weight
and power of the individual soldiers, in spite of cannon.  Lord
Palmerston told the House of Commons, that more care is taken of the
health and comfort of English troops than of any other troops in the
world; and that, hence the English can put more men into the rank, on
the day of action, on the field of battle, than any other army.
Before the bombardment of the Danish forts in the Baltic, Nelson
spent day after day, himself in the boats, on the exhausting service
of sounding the channel.  Clerk of Eldin's celebrated man;oeuvre of
breaking the line of sea-battle, and Nelson's feat of _doubling,_ or
stationing his ships one on the outer bow, and another on the outer
quarter of each of the enemy's were only translations into naval
tactics of Bonaparte's rule of concentration.  Lord Collingwood was
accustomed to tell his men, that, if they could fire three
well-directed broadsides in five minutes, no vessel could resist
them; and, from constant practice, they came to do it in three
minutes and a half.

 
        But conscious that no race of better men exists, they rely most
on the simplest means; and do not like ponderous and difficult
tactics, but delight to bring the affair hand to hand, where the
victory lies with the strength, courage, and endurance of the
individual combatants.  They adopt every improvement in rig, in
motor, in weapons, but they fundamentally believe that the best
stratagem in naval war, is to lay your ship close alongside of the
enemy's ship, and bring all your guns to bear on him, until you or he
go to the bottom.  This is the old fashion, which never goes out of
fashion, neither in nor out of England.

        It is not usually a point of honor, nor a religious sentiment,
and never any whim that they will shed their blood for; but usually
property, and right measured by property, that breeds revolution.
They have no Indian taste for a tomahawk-dance, no French taste for a
badge or a proclamation.  The Englishman is peaceably minding his
business, and earning his day's wages.  But if you offer to lay hand
on his day's wages, on his cow, or his right in common, or his shop,
he will fight to the Judgment.  Magna-charta, jury-trial,
_habeas-corpus_, star-chamber, ship-money, Popery, Plymouth-colony,
American Revolution, are all questions involving a yeoman's right to
his dinner, and, except as touching that, would not have lashed the
British nation to rage and revolt.

        Whilst they are thus instinct with a spirit of order, and of
calculation, it must be owned they are capable of larger views; but
the indulgence is expensive to them, costs great crises, or
accumulations of mental power.  In common, the horse works best with
blinders.  Nothing is more in the line of English thought, than our
unvarnished Connecticut question, "Pray, sir, how do you get your
living when you are at home?" The questions of freedom, of taxation,
of privilege, are money questions.  Heavy fellows, steeped in beer
and fleshpots, they are hard of hearing and dim of sight.  Their
drowsy minds need to be flagellated by war and trade and politics and
persecution.  They cannot well read a principle, except by the light
of fagots and of burning towns.

        Tacitus says of the Germans, "powerful only in sudden efforts,
they are impatient of toil and labor." This highly-destined race, if
it had not somewhere added the chamber of patience to its brain,
would not have built London.  I know not from which of the tribes and
temperaments that went to the composition of the people this tenacity
was supplied, but they clinch every nail they drive.  They have no
running for luck, and no immoderate speed.  They spend largely on
their fabric, and await the slow return.  Their leather lies tanning
seven years in the vat.  At Rogers's mills, in Sheffield, where I was
shown the process of making a razor and a penknife, I was told there
is no luck in making good steel; that they make no mistakes, every
blade in the hundred and in the thousand is good.  And that is
characteristic of all their work, -- no more is attempted than is
done.

        When Thor and his companions arrive at Utgard, he is told that
"nobody is permitted to remain here, unless he understand some art,
and excel in it all other men." The same question is still put to the
posterity of Thor.  A nation of laborers, every man is trained to
some one art or detail, and aims at perfection in that; not content
unless he has something in which he thinks he surpasses all other
men.  He would rather not do any thing at all, than not do it well.
I suppose no people have such thoroughness; -- from the highest to
the lowest, every man meaning to be master of his art.

        "To show capacity," a Frenchman described as the end of a
speech in debate: "no," said an Englishman, "but to set your shoulder
at the wheel, -- to advance the business." Sir Samuel Romilly refused
to speak in popular assemblies, confining himself to the House of
Commons, where a measure can be carried by a speech.  The business of
the House of Commons is conducted by a few persons, but these are
hard-worked.  Sir Robert Peel "knew the Blue Books by heart." His
colleagues and rivals carry Hansard in their heads.  The high civil
and legal offices are not beds of ease, but posts which exact
frightful amounts of mental labor.  Many of the great leaders, like
Pitt, Canning, Castlereagh, Romilly, are soon worked to death.  They
are excellent judges England of a good worker, and when they find
one, like Clarendon, Sir Philip Warwick, Sir William Coventry,
Ashley, Burke, Thurlow, Mansfield, Pitt, Eldon, Peel, or Russell,
there is nothing too good or too high for him.

        They have a wonderful heat in the pursuit of a public aim
Private persons exhibit, in scientific and antiquarian researches,
the same pertinacity as the nation showed in the coalitions in which
it yoked Europe against the empire of Bonaparte, one after the other
defeated, and still renewed, until the sixth hurled him from his
seat.

        Sir John Herschel, in completion of the work of his father, who
had made the catalogue of the stars of the northern hemisphere,
expatriated himself for years at the Cape of Good Hope, finished his
inventory of the southern heaven, came home, and redacted it in eight
years more; -- a work whose value does not begin until thirty years
have elapsed, and thenceforward a record to all ages of the highest
import.  The Admiralty sent out the Arctic expeditions year after
year, in search of Sir John Franklin, until, at last, they have
threaded their way through polar pack and Behring's Straits, and
solved the geographical problem.  Lord Elgin, at Athens, saw the
imminent ruin of the Greek remains, set up his scaffoldings, in spite
of epigrams, and, after five years' labor to collect them, got his
marbles on shipboard.  The ship struck a rock, and went to the
bottom.  He had them all fished up, by divers, at a vast expense, and
brought to London; not knowing that Haydon, Fuseli, and Canova, and
all good heads in all the world, were to be his applauders.  In the
same spirit, were the excavation and research by Sir Charles
Fellowes, for the Xanthian monument; and of Layard, for his Nineveh
sculptures.

        The nation sits in the immense city they have builded, a London
extended into every man's mind, though he live in Van Dieman's Land
or Capetown.  Faithful performance of what is undertaken to be
performed, they honor in themselves, and exact in others, as
certificate of equality with themselves.  The modern world is theirs.
They have made and make it day by day.  The commercial relations of
the world are so intimately drawn to London, that every dollar on
earth contributes to the strength of the English government.  And if
all the wealth in the planet should perish by war or deluge, they
know themselves competent to replace it.

        They have approved their Saxon blood, by their sea-going
qualities; their descent from Odin's smiths, by their hereditary
skill in working in iron; their British birth, by husbandry and
immense wheat harvests; and justified their occupancy of the centre
of habitable land, by their supreme ability and cosmopolitan spirit.
They have tilled, builded, forged, spun, and woven.  They have made
the island a thoroughfare; and London a shop, a law-court, a
record-office, and scientific bureau, inviting to strangers; a
sanctuary to refugees of every political and religious opinion; and
such a city, that almost every active man, in any nation, finds
himself, at one time or other, forced to visit it.

        In every path of practical activity, they have gone even with
the best.  There is no secret of war, in which they have not shown
mastery.  The steam-chamber of Watt, the locomotive of Stephenson,
the cotton-mule of Roberts, perform the labor of the world.  There is
no department of literature, of science, or of useful art, in which
they have not produced a first-rate book.  It is England, whose
opinion is waited for on the merit of a new invention, an improved
science.  And in the complications of the trade and politics of their
vast empire, they have been equal to every exigency, with counsel and
with conduct.  Is it their luck, or is it in the chambers of their
brain, -- it is their commercial advantage, that whatever light
appears in better method or happy invention, breaks out _in their
race_.  They are a family to which a destiny attaches, and the
Banshee has sworn that a male heir shall never be wanting.  They have
a wealth of men to fill important posts, and the vigilance of party
criticism insures the selection of a competent person.

        A proof of the energy of the British people, is the highly
artificial construction of the whole fabric.  The climate and
geography, I said, were factitious, as if the hands of man had
arranged the conditions.  The same character pervades the whole
kingdom.  Bacon said, "Rome was a state not subject to paradoxes;"
but England subsists by antagonisms and contradictions.  The
foundations of its greatness are the rolling waves; and, from first
to last, it is a museum of anomalies.  This foggy and rainy country
furnishes the world with astronomical observations.  Its short rivers
do not afford water-power, but the land shakes under the thunder of
the mills.  There is no gold mine of any importance, but there is
more gold in England than in all other countries.  It is too far
north for the culture of the vine, but the wines of all countries are
in its docks.  The French Comte de Lauraguais said, "no fruit ripens
in England but a baked apple"; but oranges and pine-apples are as
cheap in London as in the Mediterranean.  The Mark-Lane Express, or
the Custom House Returns bear out to the letter the vaunt of Pope,

        "Let India boast her palms, nor envy we
        The weeping amber, nor the spicy tree,
        While, by our oaks, those precious loads are borne,
        And realms commanded which those trees adorn."
 
        The native cattle are extinct, but the island is full of
artificial breeds.  The agriculturist Bakewell, created sheep and
cows and horses to order, and breeds in which every thing was omitted
but what is economical.  The cow is sacrificed to her bag, the ox to
his surloin.  Stall-feeding makes sperm-mills of the cattle, and
converts the stable to a chemical factory.  The rivers, lakes and
ponds, too much fished, or obstructed by factories, are artificially
filled with the eggs of salmon, turbot and herring.

        Chat Moss and the fens of Lincolnshire and Cambridgeshire are
unhealthy and too barren to pay rent.  By cylindrical tiles, and
guttapercha tubes, five millions of acres of bad land have been
drained and put on equality with the best, for rape-culture and
grass.  The climate too, which was already believed to have become
milder and drier by the enormous consumption of coal, is so far
reached by this new action, that fogs and storms are said to
disappear.  In due course, all England will be drained, and rise a
second time out of the waters.  The latest step was to call in the
aid of steam to agriculture.  Steam is almost an Englishman.  I do
not know but they will send him to Parliament, next, to make laws.
He weaves, forges, saws, pounds, fans, and now he must pump, grind,
dig, and plough for the farmer.  The markets created by the
manufacturing population have erected agriculture into a great
thriving and spending industry.  The value of the houses in Britain
is equal to the value of the soil.  Artificial aids of all kinds are
cheaper than the natural resources.  No man can afford to walk, when
the parliamentary-train carries him for a penny a mile.  Gas-burners
are cheaper than daylight in numberless floors in the cities.  All
the houses in London buy their water.  The English trade does not
exist for the exportation of native products, but on its
manufactures, or the making well every thing which is ill made
elsewhere.  They make ponchos for the Mexican, bandannas for the
Hindoo, ginseng for the Chinese, beads for the Indian, laces for the
Flemings, telescopes for astronomers, cannons for kings.

        The Board of Trade caused the best models of Greece and Italy
to be placed within the reach of every manufacturing population.
They caused to be translated from foreign languages and illustrated
by elaborate drawings, the most approved works of Munich, Berlin, and
Paris.  They have ransacked Italy to find new forms, to add a grace
to the products of their looms, their potteries, and their foundries.
(* 3)

        The nearer we look, the more artificial is their social system.
Their law is a network of fictions.  Their property, a scrip or
certificate of right to interest on money that no man ever saw.
Their social classes are made by statute.  Their ratios of power and
representation are historical and legal.  The last Reform-bill took
away political power from a mound, a ruin, and a stone-wall, whilst
Birmingham and Manchester, whose mills paid for the wars of Europe,
had no representative.  Purity in the elective Parliament is secured
by the purchase of seats.  (* 4) Foreign power is kept by armed
colonies; power at home, by a standing army of police.  The pauper
lives better than the free laborer; the thief better than the pauper;
and the transported felon better than the one under imprisonment.
The crimes are factitious, as smuggling, poaching, non-conformity,
heresy and treason.  Better, they say in England, kill a man than a
hare.  The sovereignty of the seas is maintained by the impressment
of seamen.  "The impressment of seamen," said Lord Eldon, "is the
life of our navy." Solvency is maintained by means of a national
debt, on the principle, "if you will not lend me the money, how can I
pay you?" For the administration of justice, Sir Samuel Romilly's
expedient for clearing the arrears of business in Chancery, was, the
Chancellor's staying away entirely from his court.  Their system of
education is factitious.  The Universities galvanize dead languages
into a semblance of life.  Their church is artificial.  The manners
and customs of society are artificial; -- made up men with made up
manners; -- and thus the whole is Birminghamized, and we have a
nation whose existence is a work of art; -- a cold, barren, almost
arctic isle, being made the most fruitful, luxurious and imperial
land in the whole earth.

        Man in England submits to be a product of political economy.
On a bleak moor, a mill is built, a banking-house is opened, and men
come in, as water in a sluice-way, and towns and cities rise.  Man is
made as a Birmingham button.  The rapid doubling of the population
dates from Watt's steam-engine.  A landlord, who owns a province,
says, "the tenantry are unprofitable; let me have sheep." He unroofs
the houses, and ships the population to America.  The nation is
accustomed to the instantaneous creation of wealth.  It is the maxim
of their economists, "that the greater part in value of the wealth
now existing in England, has been produced by human hands within the
last twelve months." Meantime, three or four days' rain will reduce
hundreds to starving in London.

        One secret of their power is their mutual good understanding.
Not only good minds are born among them, but all the people have good
minds.  Every nation has yielded some good wit, if, as has chanced to
many tribes, only one.  But the intellectual organization of the
English admits a communicableness of knowledge and ideas among them
all.  An electric touch by any of their national ideas, melts them
into one family, and brings the hoards of power which their
individuality is always hiving, into use and play for all.  Is it the
smallness of the country, or is it the pride and affection of race,
-- they have solidarity, or responsibleness, and trust in each other.

        Their minds, like wool, admit of a dye which is more lasting
than the cloth.  They embrace their cause with more tenacity than
their life.  Though not military, yet every common subject by the
poll is fit to make a soldier of.  These private reserved mute
family-men can adopt a public end with all their heat, and this
strength of affection makes the romance of their heroes.  The
difference of rank does not divide the national heart.  The Danish
poet Ohlenschlager complains, that who writes in Danish, writes to
two hundred readers.  In Germany, there is one speech for the
learned, and another for the masses, to that extent, that, it is
said, no sentiment or phrase from the works of any great German
writer is ever heard among the lower classes.  But in England, the
language of the noble is the language of the poor.  In Parliament, in
pulpits, in theatres, when the speakers rise to thought and passion,
the language becomes idiomatic; the people in the street best
understand the best words.  And their language seems drawn from the
Bible, the common law, and the works of Shakspeare, Bacon, Milton,
Pope, Young, Cowper, Burns, and Scott.  The island has produced two
or three of the greatest men that ever existed, but they were not
solitary in their own time.  Men quickly embodied what Newton found
out, in Greenwich observatories, and practical navigation.  The boys
know all that Hutton knew of strata, or Dalton of atoms, or Harvey of
blood-vessels; and these studies, once dangerous, are in fashion.  So
what is invented or known in agriculture, or in trade, or in war, or
in art, or in literature, and antiquities.  A great ability, not
amassed on a few giants, but poured into the general mind, so that
each of them could at a pinch stand in the shoes of the other; and
they are more bound in character, than differenced in ability or in
rank.  The laborer is a possible lord.  The lord is a possible
basket-maker.  Every man carries the English system in his brain,
knows what is confided to him, and does therein the best he can.  The
chancellor carries England on his mace, the midshipman at the point
of his dirk, the smith on his hammer, the cook in the bowl of his
spoon; the postilion cracks his whip for England, and the sailor
times his oars to "God save the King!" The very felons have their
pride in each other's English stanchness.  In politics and in war,
they hold together as by hooks of steel.  The charm in Nelson's
history, is, the unselfish greatness; the assurance of being
supported to the uttermost by those whom he supports to the
uttermost.  Whilst they are some ages ahead of the rest of the world
in the art of living; whilst in some directions they do not represent
the modern spirit, but constitute it,--this vanguard of civility and
power they coldly hold, marching in phalanx, lockstep, foot after
foot, file after file of heroes, ten thousand deep.

        (* 1) Antony Wood.

        (* 2) Man's Soule, p. 29.

        (* 3) See Memorial of H. Greenough, p. 66, New York, 1853.

        (* 4) Sir S. Romilly, purest of English patriots, decided that
the only independent mode of entering Parliament was to buy a seat,
and he bought Horsham.

 
 
 
        Chapter VI _Manners_

        I find the Englishman to be him of all men who stands firmest
in his shoes.  They have in themselves what they value in their
horses, mettle and bottom.  On the day of my arrival at Liverpool, a
gentleman, in describing to me the Lord Lieutenant of Ireland,
happened to say, "Lord Clarendon has pluck like a cock, and will
fight till he dies;" and, what I heard first I heard last, and the
one thing the English value, is pluck.  The cabmen have it; the
merchants have it; the bishops have it; the women have it; the
journals have it; the Times newspaper, they say, is the pluckiest
thing in England, and Sydney Smith had made it a proverb, that little
Lord John Russell, the minister, would take the command of the
Channel fleet to-morrow.

        They require you to dare to be of your own opinion, and they
hate the practical cowards who cannot in affairs answer directly yes
or no.  They dare to displease, nay, they will let you break all the
commandments, if you do it natively, and with spirit.  You must be
somebody; then you may do this or that, as you will.

        Machinery has been applied to all work, and carried to such
perfection, that little is left for the men but to mind the engines
and feed the furnaces.  But the machines require punctual service,
and, as they never tire, they prove too much for their tenders.
Mines, forges, mills, breweries, railroads, steampump, steamplough,
drill of regiments, drill of police, rule of court, and shop-rule,
have operated to give a mechanical regularity to all the habit and
action of men.  A terrible machine has possessed itself of the
ground, the air, the men and women, and hardly even thought is free.

        The mechanical might and organization requires in the people
constitution and answering spirits: and he who goes among them must
have some weight of metal.  At last, you take your hint from the fury
of life you find, and say, one thing is plain, this is no country for
fainthearted people: don't creep about diffidently; make up your
mind; take your own course, and you shall find respect and
furtherance.

        It requires, men say, a good constitution to travel in Spain.
I say as much of England, for other cause, simply on account of the
vigor and brawn of the people.  Nothing but the most serious
business, could give one any counterweight to these Baresarks, though
they were only to order eggs and muffins for their breakfast.  The
Englishman speaks with all his body.  His elocution is stomachic, --
as the American's is labial.  The Englishman is very petulant and
precise about his accommodation at inns, and on the roads; a quiddle
about his toast and his chop, and every species of convenience, and
loud and pungent in his expressions of impatience at any neglect.
His vivacity betrays itself, at all points, in his manners, in his
respiration, and the inarticulate noises he makes in clearing the
throat; -- all significant of burly strength.  He has stamina; he can
take the initiative in emergencies.  He has that _aplomb_, which
results from a good adjustment of the moral and physical nature, and
the obedience of all the powers to the will; as if the axes of his
eyes were united to his backbone, and only moved with the trunk.

        This vigor appears in the incuriosity, and stony neglect, each
of every other.  Each man walks, eats, drinks, shaves, dresses,
gesticulates, and, in every manner, acts, and suffers without
reference to the bystanders, in his own fashion, only careful not to
interfere with them, or annoy them; not that he is trained to neglect
the eyes of his neighbors, -- he is really occupied with his own
affair, and does not think of them.  Every man in this polished
country consults only his convenience, as much as a solitary pioneer
in Wisconsin.  I know not where any personal eccentricity is so
freely allowed, and no man gives himself any concern with it.  An
Englishman walks in a pouring rain, swinging his closed umbrella like
a walking-stick; wears a wig, or a shawl, or a saddle, or stands on
his head, and no remark is made.  And as he has been doing this for
several generations, it is now in the blood.

        In short, every one of these islanders is an island himself,
safe, tranquil, incommunicable.  In a company of strangers, you would
think him deaf; his eyes never wander from his table and newspaper.
He is never betrayed into any curiosity or unbecoming emotion.  They
have all been trained in one severe school of manners, and never put
off the harness.  He does not give his hand.  He does not let you
meet his eye.  It is almost an affront to look a man in the face,
without being introduced.  In mixed or in select companies they do
not introduce persons; so that a presentation is a circumstance as
valid as a contract.  Introductions are sacraments.  He withholds his
name.  At the hotel, he is hardly willing to whisper it to the clerk
at the book-office.  If he give you his private address on a card, it
is like an avowal of friendship; and his bearing, on being
introduced, is cold, even though he is seeking your acquaintance, and
is studying how he shall serve you.

        It was an odd proof of this impressive energy, that, in my
lectures, I hesitated to read and threw out for its impertinence many
a disparaging phrase, which I had been accustomed to spin, about
poor, thin, unable mortals; -- so much had the fine physique and the
personal vigor of this robust race worked on my imagination.

        I happened to arrive in England, at the moment of a commercial
crisis.  But it was evident, that, let who will fail, England will
not.  These people have sat here a thousand years, and here will
continue to sit.  They will not break up, or arrive at any desperate
revolution, like their neighbors; for they have as much energy, as
much continence of character as they ever had.  The power and
possession which surround them are their own creation, and they exert
the same commanding industry at this moment.

        They are positive, methodical, cleanly, and formal, loving
routine, and conventional ways; loving truth and religion, to be
sure, but inexorable on points of form.  All the world praises the
comfort and private appointments of an English inn, and of English
households.  You are sure of neatness and of personal decorum.  A
Frenchman may possibly be clean; an Englishman is conscientiously
clean.  A certain order and complete propriety is found in his dress
and in his belongings.

        Born in a harsh and wet climate, which keeps him in doors
whenever he is at rest, and being of an affectionate and loyal
temper, he dearly loves his house.  If he is rich, he buys a demesne,
and builds a hall; if he is in middle condition, he spares no expense
on his house.  Without, it is all planted: within, it is wainscoted,
carved, curtained, hung with pictures, and filled with good
furniture.  'Tis a passion which survives all others, to deck and
improve it.  Hither he brings all that is rare and costly, and with
the national tendency to sit fast in the same spot for many
generations, it comes to be, in the course of time, a museum of
heirlooms, gifts, and trophies of the adventures and exploits of the
family.  He is very fond of silver plate, and, though he have no
gallery of portraits of his ancestors, he has of their punch-bowls
and porringers.  Incredible amounts of plate are found in good
houses, and the poorest have some spoon or saucepan, gift of a
godmother, saved out of better times.

        An English family consists of a few persons, who, from youth to
age, are found revolving within a few feet of each other, as if tied
by some invisible ligature, tense as that cartilage which we have
seen attaching the two Siamese.  England produces under favorable
conditions of ease and culture the finest women in the world.  And,
as the men are affectionate and true-hearted, the women inspire and
refine them.  Nothing can be more delicate without being fantastical,
nothing more firm and based in nature and sentiment, than the
courtship and mutual carriage of the sexes.  The song of 1596 says,
"The wife of every Englishman is counted blest." The sentiment of
Imogen in Cymbeline is copied from English nature; and not less the
Portia of Brutus, the Kate Percy, and the Desdemona.  The romance
does not exceed the height of noble passion in Mrs. Lucy Hutchinson,
or in Lady Russell, or even as one discerns through the plain prose
of Pepys's Diary, the sacred habit of an English wife.  Sir Samuel
Romilly could not bear the death of his wife.  Every class has its
noble and tender examples.

        Domesticity is the taproot which enables the nation to branch
wide and high.  The motive and end of their trade and empire is to
guard the independence and privacy of their homes.  Nothing so much
marks their manners as the concentration on their household ties.
This domesticity is carried into court and camp.  Wellington governed
India and Spain and his own troops, and fought battles like a good
family-man, paid his debts, and, though general of an army in Spain
could not stir abroad for fear of public creditors.  This taste for
house and parish merits has of course its doting and foolish side.
Mr. Cobbett attributes the huge popularity of Perceval, prime
minister in 1810, to the fact that he was wont to go to church, every
Sunday, with a large quarto gilt prayer-book under one arm, his wife
hanging on the other, and followed by a long brood of children.

        They keep their old customs, costumes, and pomps, their wig and
mace, sceptre and crown.  The middle ages still lurk in the streets
of London.  The Knights of the Bath take oath to defend injured
ladies; the gold-stick-in-waiting survives.  They repeated the
ceremonies of the eleventh century in the coronation of the present
Queen.  A hereditary tenure is natural to them.  Offices, farms,
trades, and traditions descend so.  Their leases run for a hundred
and a thousand years.  Terms of service and partnership are lifelong,
or are inherited.  "Holdship has been with me," said Lord Eldon,
"eight-and-twenty years, knows all my business and books." Antiquity
of usage is sanction enough.  Wordsworth says of the small
freeholders of Westmoreland, "Many of these humble sons of the hills
had a consciousness that the land which they tilled had for more than
five hundred years been possessed by men of the same name and blood."
The ship-carpenter in the public yards, my lord's gardener and
porter, have been there for more than a hundred years, grandfather,
father, and son.

        The English power resides also in their dislike of change.
They have difficulty in bringing their reason to act, and on all
occasions use their memory first.  As soon as they have rid
themselves of some grievance, and settled the better practice, they
make haste to fix it as a finality, and never wish to hear of
alteration more.

        Every Englishman is an embryonic chancellor: His instinct is to
search for a precedent.  The favorite phrase of their law, is, "a
custom whereof the memory of man runneth not back to the contrary."
The barons say, "_Nolumus mutari_;" and the cockneys stifle the
curiosity of the foreigner on the reason of any practice, with "Lord,
sir, it was always so." They hate innovation.  Bacon told them, Time
was the right reformer; Chatham, that "confidence was a plant of slow
growth;" Canning, to "advance with the times;" and Wellington, that
"habit was ten times nature." All their statesmen learn the
irresistibility of the tide of custom, and have invented many fine
phrases to cover this slowness of perception, and prehensility of
tail.

        A seashell should be the crest of England, not only because it
represents a power built on the waves, but also the hard finish of
the men.  The Englishman is finished like a cowry or a murex.  After
the spire and the spines are formed, or, with the formation, a juice
exudes, and a hard enamel varnishes every part.  The keeping of the
proprieties is as indispensable as clean linen.  No merit quite
countervails the want of this, whilst this sometimes stands in lieu
of all.  "'Tis in bad taste," is the most formidable word an
Englishman can pronounce.  But this japan costs them dear.  There is
a prose in certain Englishmen, which exceeds in wooden deadness all
rivalry with other countrymen.  There is a knell in the conceit and
externality of their voice, which seems to say, _Leave all hope
behind_.  In this Gibraltar of propriety, mediocrity gets intrenched,
and consolidated, and founded in adamant.  An Englishman of fashion
is like one of those souvenirs, bound in gold vellum, enriched with
delicate engravings, on thick hot-pressed paper, fit for the hands of
ladies and princes, but with nothing in it worth reading or
remembering.

        A severe decorum rules the court and the cottage.  When
Thalberg, the pianist, was one evening performing before the Queen,
at Windsor, in a private party, the Queen accompanied him with her
voice.  The circumstance took air, and all England shuddered from sea
to sea.  The indecorum was never repeated.  Cold, repressive manners
prevail.  No enthusiasm is permitted except at the opera.  They avoid
every thing marked.  They require a tone of voice that excites no
attention in the room.  Sir Philip Sydney is one of the patron saints
of England, of whom Wotton said, "His wit was the measure of
congruity."

        Pretension and vaporing are once for all distasteful.  They
keep to the other extreme of low tone in dress and manners.  They
avoid pretension and go right to the heart of the thing.  They hate
nonsense, sentimentalism, and highflown expression; they use a
studied plainness.  Even Brummel their fop was marked by the severest
simplicity in dress.  They value themselves on the absence of every
thing theatrical in the public business, and on conciseness and going
to the point, in private affairs.

        In an aristocratical country, like England, not the Trial by
Jury, but the dinner is the capital institution.  It is the mode of
doing honor to a stranger, to invite him to eat, -- and has been for
many hundred years.  "And they think," says the Venetian traveller of
1500, "no greater honor can be conferred or received, than to invite
others to eat with them, or to be invited themselves, and they would
sooner give five or six ducats to provide an entertainment for a
person, than a groat to assist him in any distress."  (*) It is
reserved to the end of the day, the family-hour being generally six,
in London, and, if any company is expected, one or two hours later.
Every one dresses for dinner, in his own house, or in another man's.
The guests are expected to arrive within half an hour of the time
fixed by card of invitation, and nothing but death or mutilation is
permitted to detain them.  The English dinner is precisely the model
on which our own are constructed in the Atlantic cities.  The company
sit one or two hours, before the ladies leave the table.  The
gentlemen remain over their wine an hour longer, and rejoin the
ladies in the drawing-room, and take coffee.  The dress-dinner
generates a talent of table-talk, which reaches great perfection: the
stories are so good, that one is sure they must have been often told
before, to have got such happy turns.  Hither come all manner of
clever projects, bits of popular science, of practical invention, of
miscellaneous humor; political, literary, and personal news;
railroads, horses, diamonds, agriculture, horticulture, pisciculture,
and wine.

        (*) "Relation of England."

        English stories, bon-mots, and the recorded table-talk of their
wits, are as good as the best of the French.  In America, we are apt
scholars, but have not yet attained the same perfection: for the
range of nations from which London draws, and the steep contrasts of
condition create the picturesque in society, as broken country makes
picturesque landscape, whilst our prevailing equality makes a prairie
tameness: and secondly, because the usage of a dress-dinner every day
at dark, has a tendency to hive and produce to advantage every thing
good.  Much attrition has worn every sentence into a bullet.  Also
one meets now and then with polished men, who know every thing, have
tried every thing, can do every thing, and are quite superior to
letters and science.  What could they not, if only they would?

 
        Chapter VII _Truth_

        The teutonic tribes have a national singleness of heart, which
contrasts wit races.  The German name has a proverbial significance
of sincerity and honest meaning. The arts bear testimony to it.  The
faces of clergy and laity in old sculptures and illuminated missals
are charged with earnest belief.  Add to this hereditary rectitude,
the punctuality and precise dealing which commerce creates, and you
have the English truth and credit.  The government strictly performs
its engagements.  The subjects do not understand trifling on its
part.  When any breach of promise occurred, in the old days of
prerogative, it was resented by the people as an intolerable
grievance.  And, in modern times, any slipperiness in the government
in political faith, or any repudiation or crookedness in matters of
finance, would bring the whole nation to a committee of inquiry and
reform.  Private men keep their promises, never so trivial.  Down
goes the flying word on the tablets, and is indelible as Domesday
Book.

        Their practical power rests on their national sincerity.
Veracity derives from instinct, and marks superiority in
organization.  Nature has endowed some animals with cunning, as a
compensation for strength withheld; but it has provoked the malice of
all others, as if avengers of public wrong.  In the nobler kinds,
where strength could be afforded, her races are loyal to truth, as
truth is the foundation of the social state.  Beasts that make no
truce with man, do not break faith with each other.  'Tis said, that
the wolf, who makes a _cache_ of his prey, and brings his fellows
with him to the spot, if, on digging, it is not found, is instantly
and unresistingly torn in pieces.  English veracity seems to result
on a sounder animal structure, as if they could afford it.  They are
blunt in saying what they think, sparing of promises, and they
require plaindealing of others.  We will not have to do with a man in
a mask.  Let us know the truth.  Draw a straight line, hit whom and
where it will.  Alfred, whom the affection of the nation makes the
type of their race, is called by his friend Asser, the
_truth-speaker_; _Alueredus veridicus_.  Geoffrey of Monmouth says of
King Aurelius, uncle of Arthur, that "above all things he hated a
lie." The Northman Guttorm said to King Olaf, "it is royal work to
fulfil royal words." The mottoes of their families are monitory
proverbs, as, _Fare fac_, -- Say, do, -- of the Fairfaxes; _Say and
seal_, of the house of Fiennes; _Vero nil verius_, of the DeVeres.
To be king of their word, is their pride.  When they unmask cant,
they say, "the English of this is," &c.; and to give the lie is the
extreme insult.  The phrase of the lowest of the people is
"honor-bright," and their vulgar praise, "his word is as good as his
bond." They hate shuffling and equivocation, and the cause is damaged
in the public opinion, on which any paltering can be fixed.  Even
Lord Chesterfield, with his French breeding, when he came to define a
gentleman, declared that truth made his distinction: and nothing ever
spoken by him would find so hearty a suffrage from his nation.  The
Duke of Wellington, who had the best right to say so, advises the
French General Kellermann, that he may rely on the parole of an
English officer.  The English, of all classes, value themselves on
this trait, as distinguishing them from the French, who, in the
popular belief, are more polite than true.  An Englishman
understates, avoids the superlative, checks himself in compliments,
alleging, that in the French language, one cannot speak without
lying.

        They love reality in wealth, power, hospitality, and do not
easily learn to make a show, and take the world as it goes.  They are
not fond of ornaments, and if they wear them, they must be gems.
They read gladly in old Fuller, that a lady, in the reign of
Elizabeth, "would have as patiently digested a lie, as the wearing of
false stones or pendants of counterfeit pearl." They have the
earth-hunger, or preference for property in land, which is said to
mark the Teutonic nations.  They build of stone: public and private
buildings are massive and durable: In comparing their ships' houses,
and public offices with the American, it is commonly said, that they
spend a pound, where we spend a dollar.  Plain rich clothes, plain
rich equipage, plain rich finish throughout their house and
belongings, mark the English truth.

        They confide in each other, -- English believes in English The
French feel the superiority of this probity.  The Englishman is not
springing a trap for his admiration, but is honestly minding his
business.  The Frenchman is vain.  Madame de Stael says, that the
English irritated Napoleon, mainly, because they have found out how
to unite success with honesty.  She was not aware how wide an
application her foreign readers would give to the remark.  Wellington
discovered the ruin of Bonaparte's affairs, by his own probity.  He
augured ill of the empire, as soon as he saw that it was mendacious,
and lived by war.  If war do not bring in its sequel new trade,
better agriculture and manufactures, but only games, fireworks, and
spectacles, -- no prosperity could support it; much less, a nation
decimated for conscripts, and out of pocket, like France.  So he
drudged for years on his military works at Lisbon, and from this base
at last extended his gigantic lines to Waterloo, believing in his
countrymen and their syllogisms above all the rhodomontade of Europe.

        At a St. George's festival, in Montreal, where I happened to be
a guest, since my return home, I observed that the chairman
complimented his compatriots, by saying, "they confided that wherever
they met an Englishman, they found a man who would speak the truth."
And one cannot think this festival fruitless, if, all over the world,
on the 23d of April, wherever two or three English are found, they
meet to encourage each other in the nationality of veracity.

        In the power of saying rude truth, sometimes in the lion's
mouth, no men surpass them.  On the king's birthday, when each bishop
was expected to offer the king a purse of gold, Latimer gave Henry
VIII.  a copy of the Vulgate, with a mark at the passage,
"Whoremongers and adulterers God will judge;" and they so honor
stoutness in each other, that the king passed it over.  They are
tenacious of their belief, and cannot easily change their opinions to
suit the hour.  They are like ships with too much head on to come
quickly about, nor will prosperity or even adversity be allowed to
shake their habitual view of conduct.  Whilst I was in London, M.
Guizot arrived there on his escape from Paris, in February, 1848.
Many private friends called on him.  His name was immediately
proposed as an honorary member of the Athenaeum.  M.  Guizot was
blackballed.  Certainly, they knew the distinction of his name.  But
the Englishman is not fickle.  He had really made up his mind, now
for years as he read his newspaper, to hate and despise M.  Guizot;
and the altered position of the man as an illustrious exile, and a
guest in the country, make no difference to him, as they would
instantly, to an American.

        They require the same adherence, thorough conviction and
reality in public men.  It is the want of character which makes the
low reputation of the Irish members.  "See them," they said, "one
hundred and twenty-seven all voting like sheep, never proposing any
thing, and all but four voting the income tax," -- which was an
ill-judged concession of the Government, relieving Irish property
from the burdens charged on English.

        They have a horror of adventurers in or out of Parliament.  The
ruling passion of Englishmen, in these days, is, a terror of humbug.
In the same proportion, they value honesty, stoutness, and adherence
to your own.  They like a man committed to his objects.  They hate
the French, as frivolous; they hate the Irish, as aimless; they hate
the Germans, as professors.  In February, 1848, they said, Look, the
French king and his party fell for want of a shot; they had not
conscience to shoot, so entirely was the pith and heart of monarchy
eaten out.

        They attack their own politicians every day, on the same
grounds, as adventurers.  They love stoutness in standing for your
right, in declining money or promotion that costs any concession.
The barrister refuses the silk gown of Queen's Counsel, if his junior
have it one day earlier.  Lord Collingwood would not accept his medal
for victory on 14th February, 1797, if he did not receive one for
victory on 1st June, 1794; and the long withholden medal was
accorded.  When Castlereagh dissuaded Lord Wellington from going to
the king's levee, until the unpopular Cintra business had been
explained, he replied, "You furnish me a reason for going.  I will go
to this, or I will never go to a king's levee." The radical mob at
Oxford cried after the tory lord Eldon, "There's old Eldon; cheer
him; he never ratted." They have given the parliamentary nickname of
_Trimmers_ to the timeservers, whom English character does not love.
(*)

        (*) It is an unlucky moment to remember these sparkles of
solitary virtue in the face of the honors lately paid in England to
the Emperor Louis Napoleon.  I am sure that no Englishman whom I had
the happiness to know, consented, when the aristocracy and the
commons of London cringed like a Neapolitan rabble, before a
successful thief.  But -- how to resist one step, though odious, in a
linked series of state necessities?  -- Governments must always learn
too late, that the use of dishonest agents is as ruinous for nations
as for single men.

        They are very liable in their politics to extraordinary
delusions, thus, to believe what stands recorded in the gravest
books, that the movement of 10 April, 1848, was urged or assisted by
foreigners: which, to be sure, is paralleled by the democratic whimsy
in this country, which I have noticed to be shared by men sane on
other points, that the English are at the bottom of the agitation of
slavery, in American politics: and then again to the French popular
legends on the subject of _perfidious Albion_.  But suspicion will
make fools of nations as of citizens.

        A slow temperament makes them less rapid and ready than other
countrymen, and has given occasion to the observation, that English wit comes
afterwards, -- which the French denote as _esprit d'escalier_.  This dulness
makes their attachment to home, and their adherence in all foreign countries
to home habits.  The Englishman who visits Mount Etna, will carry his
teakettle to the top.  The old Italian author of the "Relation of England"
(in 1500), says, "I have it on the best information, that, when the war is
actually raging most furiously, they will seek for good eating, and all their
other comforts, without thinking what harm might befall them." Then their
eyes seem to be set at the bottom of a tunnel, and they affirm the one small
fact they know, with the best faith in the world that nothing else exists.
And, as their own belief in guineas is perfect, they readily, on all
occasions, apply the pecuniary argument as final.  Thus when the Rochester
rappings began to be heard of in England, a man deposited 100 pounds in a
sealed box in the Dublin Bank, and then advertised in the newspapers to all
somnambulists, mesmerizers, and others, that whoever could tell him the
number of his note, should have the money.  He let it lie there six months,
the newspapers now and then, at his instance, stimulating the attention of
the adepts; but none could ever tell him; and he said, "now let me never be
bothered more with this proven lie." It is told of a good Sir John, that he
heard a case stated by counsel, and made up his mind; then the counsel for
the other side taking their turn to speak, he found himself so unsettled and
perplexed, that he exclaimed, "So help me God!  I will never listen to
evidence again."  Any number of delightful examples of this English stolidity
are the anecdotes of Europe.  I knew a very worthy man, -- a magistrate, I
believe he was, in the town of Derby, -- who went to the opera, to see
Malibran.  In one scene, the heroine was to rush across a ruined bridge.  Mr.
B.  arose, and mildly yet firmly called the attention of the audience and the
performers to the fact, that, in his judgment, the bridge was unsafe!  This
English stolidity contrasts with French wit and tact.  The French, it is
commonly said, have greatly more influence in Europe than the English.  What
influence the English have is by brute force of wealth and power; that of the
French by affinity and talent.  The Italian is subtle, the Spaniard
treacherous: tortures, it was said, could never wrest from an Egyptian the
confession of a secret.  None of these traits belong to the Englishman.  His
choler and conceit force every thing out.  Defoe, who knew his countrymen
well, says of them,

        "In close intrigue, their faculty's but weak,
        For generally whate'er they know, they speak,
        And often their own counsels undermine
        By mere infirmity without design;
        From whence, the learned say, it doth proceed,
        That English treasons never can succeed;
        For they're so open-hearted, you may know
        Their own most secret thoughts, and others' too."
 
 
 
 
        Chapter VIII _Character_
 
        The english race are reputed morose.  I do not know that they
have sadder brows than their neighbors of northern climates.  They
are sad by comparison with the singing and dancing nations: not
sadder, but slow and staid, as finding their joys at home.  They,
too, believe that where there is no enjoyment of life, there can be
no vigor and art in speech or thought: that your merry heart goes all
the way, your sad one tires in a mile.  This trait of gloom has been
fixed on them by French travellers, who, from Froissart, Voltaire, Le
Sage, Mirabeau, down to the lively journalists of the _feuilletons_,
have spent their wit on the solemnity of their neighbors.  The French
say, gay conversation is unknown in their island.  The Englishman
finds no relief from reflection, except in reflection.  When he
wishes for amusement, he goes to work.  His hilarity is like an
attack of fever.  Religion, the theatre, and the reading the books of
his country, all feed and increase his natural melancholy.  The
police does not interfere with public diversions.  It thinks itself
bound in duty to respect the pleasures and rare gayety of this
inconsolable nation; and their well-known courage is entirely
attributable to their disgust of life.

        I suppose, their gravity of demeanor and their few words have
obtained this reputation.  As compared with the Americans, I think
them cheerful and contented.  Young people, in this country, are much
more prone to melancholy.  The English have a mild aspect, and a
ringing cheerful voice.  They are large-natured, and not so easily
amused as the southerners, and are among them as grown people among
children, requiring war, or trade, or engineering, or science,
instead of frivolous games.  They are proud and private, and, even if
disposed to recreation, will avoid an open garden.  They sported
sadly; _ils s'amusaient tristement, selon la coutume de leur pays_,
said Froissart; and, I suppose, never nation built their party-walls
so thick, or their garden-fences so high.  Meat and wine produce no
effect on them: they are just as cold, quiet, and composed, at the
end, as at the beginning of dinner.

        The reputation of taciturnity they have enjoyed for six or
seven hundred years; and a kind of pride in bad public speaking is
noted in the House of Commons, as if they were willing to show that
they did not live by their tongues, or thought they spoke well enough
if they had the tone of gentlemen.  In mixed company, they shut their
mouths.  A Yorkshire mill-owner told me, he had ridden more than once
all the way from London to Leeds, in the first-class carriage, with
the same persons, and no word exchanged.  The club-houses were
established to cultivate social habits, and it is rare that more than
two eat together, and oftenest one eats alone.  Was it then a stroke
of humor in the serious Swedenborg, or was it only his pitiless
logic, that made him shut up the English souls in a heaven by
themselves?

        They are contradictorily described as sour, splenetic, and
stubborn, -- and as mild, sweet, and sensible.  The truth is, they
have great range and variety of character.  Commerce sends abroad
multitudes of different classes.  The choleric Welshman, the fervid
Scot, the bilious resident in the East or West Indies, are wide of
the perfect behavior of the educated and dignified man of family.  So
is the burly farmer; so is the country 'squire, with his narrow and
violent life.  In every inn, is the Commercial-Room, in which
`travellers,' or bagmen who carry patterns, and solicit orders, for
the manufacturers, are wont to be entertained.  It easily happens
that this class should characterize England to the foreigner, who
meets them on the road, and at every public house, whilst the gentry
avoid the taverns, or seclude themselves whilst in them.

        But these classes are the right English stock, and may fairly
show the national qualities, before yet art and education have dealt
with them.  They are good lovers, good haters, slow but obstinate
admirers, and, in all things, very much steeped in their temperament,
like men hardly awaked from deep sleep, which they enjoy.  Their
habits and instincts cleave to nature.  They are of the earth,
earthy; and of the sea, as the sea-kinds, attached to it for what it
yields them, and not from any sentiment.  They are full of coarse
strength, rude exercise, butcher's meat, and sound sleep; and suspect
any poetic insinuation or any hint for the conduct of life which
reflects on this animal existence, as if somebody were fumbling at
the umbilical cord and might stop their supplies.  They doubt a man's
sound judgment, if he does not eat with appetite, and shake their
heads if he is particularly chaste.  Take them as they come, you
shall find in the common people a surly indifference, sometimes
gruffness and ill temper; and, in minds of more power, magazines of
inexhaustible war, challenging

        "The ruggedest hour that time and spite dare bring
        To frown upon the enraged Northumberland."
 
        They are headstrong believers and defenders of their opinion,
and not less resolute in maintaining their whim and perversity.
Hezekiah Woodward wrote a book against the Lord's Prayer.  And one
can believe that Burton the Anatomist of Melancholy, having predicted
from the stars the hour of his death, slipped the knot himself round
his own neck, not to falsify his horoscope.

        Their looks bespeak an invincible stoutness: they have extreme
difficulty to run away, and will die game.  Wellington said of the
young coxcombs of the Life-Guards delicately brought up, "but the
puppies fight well;" and Nelson said of his sailors, "they really
mind shot no more than peas." Of absolute stoutness no nation has
more or better examples.  They are good at storming redoubts, at
boarding frigates, at dying in the last ditch, or any desperate
service which has daylight and honor in it; but not, I think, at
enduring the rack, or any passive obedience, like jumping off a
castle-roof at the word of a czar.  Being both vascular and highly
organized, so as to be very sensible of pain; and intellectual, so as
to see reason and glory in a matter.

        Of that constitutional force, which yields the supplies of the
day, they have the more than enough, the excess which creates courage
on fortitude, genius in poetry, invention in mechanics, enterprise in
trade, magnificence in wealth, splendor in ceremonies, petulance and
projects in youth.  The young men have a rude health which runs into
peccant humors.  They drink brandy like water, cannot expend their
quantities of waste strength on riding, hunting, swimming, and
fencing, and run into absurd frolics with the gravity of the
Eumenides.  They stoutly carry into every nook and corner of the
earth their turbulent sense; leaving no lie uncontradicted; no
pretension unexamined.  They chew hasheesh; cut themselves with
poisoned creases; swing their hammock in the boughs of the Bohon
Upas; taste every poison; buy every secret; at Naples, they put St.
Januarius's blood in an alembic; they saw a hole into the head of the
"winking Virgin," to know why she winks; measure with an English
footrule every cell of the Inquisition, every Turkish caaba, every
Holy of holies; translate and send to Bentley the arcanum bribed and
bullied away from shuddering Bramins; and measure their own strength
by the terror they cause.  These travellers are of every class, the
best and the worst; and it may easily happen that those of rudest
behavior are taken notice of and remembered.  The Saxon melancholy in
the vulgar rich and poor appears as gushes of ill-humor, which every
check exasperates into sarcasm and vituperation.  There are
multitudes of rude young English who have the self-sufficiency and
bluntness of their nation, and who, with their disdain of the rest of
mankind, and with this indigestion and choler, have made the English
traveller a proverb for uncomfortable and offensive manners.  It was
no bad description of the Briton generically, what was said two
hundred years ago, of one particular Oxford scholar: "He was a very
bold man, uttered any thing that came into his mind, not only among
his companions, but in public coffee-houses, and would often speak
his mind of particular persons then accidentally present, without
examining the company he was in; for which he was often reprimanded,
and several times threatened to be kicked and beaten."

        The common Englishman is prone to forget a cardinal article in
the bill of social rights, that every man has a right to his own
ears.  No man can claim to usurp more than a few cubic feet of the
audibilities of a public room, or to put upon the company with the
loud statement of his crotchets or personalities.

        But it is in the deep traits of race that the fortunes of
nations are written, and however derived, whether a happier tribe or
mixture of tribes, the air, or what circumstance, that mixed for them
the golden mean of temperament, -- here exists the best stock in the
world, broad-fronted, broad-bottomed, best for depth, range, and
equability, men of aplomb and reserves, great range and many moods,
strong instincts, yet apt for culture; war-class as well as clerks;
earls and tradesmen; wise minority, as well as foolish majority;
abysmal temperament, hiding wells of wrath, and glooms on which no
sunshine settles; alternated with a common sense and humanity which
hold them fast to every piece of cheerful duty; making this
temperament a sea to which all storms are superficial; a race to
which their fortunes flow, as if they alone had the elastic
organization at once fine and robust enough for dominion; as if the
burly inexpressive, now mute and contumacious, now fierce and
sharp-tongued dragon, which once made the island light with his fiery
breath, had bequeathed his ferocity to his conqueror.  They hide
virtues under vices, or the semblance of them.  It is the misshapen
hairy Scandinavian troll again, who lifts the cart out of the mire,
or "threshes the corn that ten day-laborers could not end," but it is
done in the dark, and with muttered maledictions.  He is a churl with
a soft place in his heart, whose speech is a brash of bitter waters,
but who loves to help you at a pinch.  He says no, and serves you,
and your thanks disgust him.  Here was lately a cross-grained miser,
odd and ugly, resembling in countenance the portrait of Punch, with
the laugh left out; rich by his own industry; sulking in a lonely
house; who never gave a dinner to any man, and disdained all
courtesies; yet as true a worshipper of beauty in form and color as
ever existed, and profusely pouring over the cold mind of his
countrymen creations of grace and truth, removing the reproach of
sterility from English art, catching from their savage climate every
fine hint, and importing into their galleries every tint and trait of
sunnier cities and skies; making an era in painting; and, when he saw
that the splendor of one of his pictures in the Exhibition dimmed his
rival's that hung next it, secretly took a brush and blackened his
own.

        They do not wear their heart in their sleeve for daws to peck
at.  They have that phlegm or staidness, which it is a compliment to
disturb.  "Great men," said Aristotle, "are always of a nature
originally melancholy." 'Tis the habit of a mind which attaches to
abstractions with a passion which gives vast results.  They dare to
displease, they do not speak to expectation.  They like the sayers of
No, better than the sayers of Yes.  Each of them has an opinion which
he feels it becomes him to express all the more that it differs from
yours.  They are meditating opposition.  This gravity is inseparable
from minds of great resources.

        There is an English hero superior to the French, the German,
the Italian, or the Greek.  When he is brought to the strife with
fate, he sacrifices a richer material possession, and on more purely
metaphysical grounds.  He is there with his own consent, face to face
with fortune, which he defies.  On deliberate choice, and from
grounds of character, he has elected his part to live and die for,
and dies with grandeur.  This race has added new elements to
humanity, and has a deeper root in the world.

        They have great range of scale, from ferocity to exquisite
refinement.  With larger scale, they have great retrieving power.
After running each tendency to an extreme, they try another tack with
equal heat.  More intellectual than other races, when they live with
other races, they do not take their language, but bestow their own.
They subsidize other nations, and are not subsidized.  They
proselyte, and are not proselyted.  They assimilate other races to
themselves, and are not assimilated.  The English did not calculate
the conquest of the Indies.  It fell to their character.  So they
administer in different parts of the world, the codes of every empire
and race; in Canada, old French law; in the Mauritius, the Code
Napoleon; in the West Indies, the edicts of the Spanish Cortes; in
the East Indies, the Laws of Menu; in the Isle of Man, of the
Scandinavian Thing; at the Cape of Good Hope, of the old Netherlands;
and in the Ionian Islands, the Pandects of Justinian.

        They are very conscious of their advantageous position in
history.  England is the lawgiver, the patron, the instructor, the
ally.  Compare the tone of the French and of the English press: the
first querulous, captious, sensitive about English opinion; the
English press is never timorous about French opinion, but arrogant
and contemptuous.

        They are testy and headstrong through an excess of will and
bias; churlish as men sometimes please to be who do not forget a
debt, who ask no favors, and who will do what they like with their
own.  With education and intercourse, these asperities wear off, and
leave the good will pure.  If anatomy is reformed according to
national tendencies, I suppose, the spleen will hereafter be found in
the Englishman, not found in the American, and differencing the one
from the other.  I anticipate another anatomical discovery, that this
organ will be found to be cortical and caducous, that they are
superficially morose, but at last tender-hearted, herein differing
from Rome and the Latin nations.  Nothing savage, nothing mean
resides in the English heart.  They are subject to panics of
credulity and of rage, but the temper of the nation, however
disturbed, settles itself soon and easily, as, in this temperate
zone, the sky after whatever storms clears again, and serenity is its
normal condition.

        A saving stupidity masks and protects their perception as the
curtain of the eagle's eye.  Our swifter Americans, when they first
deal with English, pronounce them stupid; but, later, do them justice
as people who wear well, or hide their strength.  To understand the
power of performance that is in their finest wits, in the patient
Newton, or in the versatile transcendent poets, or in the Dugdales,
Gibbons, Hallams, Eldons, and Peels, one should see how English
day-laborers hold out.  High and low, they are of an unctuous
texture.  There is an adipocere in their constitution, as if they had
oil also for their mental wheels, and could perform vast amounts of
work without damaging themselves.

        Even the scale of expense on which people live, and to which
scholars and professional men conform, proves the tension of their
muscle, when vast numbers are found who can each lift this enormous
load.  I might even add, their daily feasts argue a savage vigor of
body.

        No nation was ever so rich in able men; "gentlemen," as Charles
I.  said of Strafford, "whose abilities might make a prince rather
afraid than ashamed in the greatest affairs of state;" men of such
temper, that, like Baron Vere, "had one seen him returning from a
victory, he would by his silence have suspected that he had lost the
day; and, had he beheld him in a retreat, he would have collected him
a conqueror by the cheerfulness of his spirit."  (*)

        (*) Fuller.  Worthies of England.

        The following passage from the Heimskringla might almost stand
as a portrait of the modern Englishman: -- "Haldor was very stout and
strong, and remarkably handsome in appearances.  King Harold gave him
this testimony, that he, among all his men, cared least about
doubtful circumstances, whether they betokened danger or pleasure;
for, whatever turned up, he was never in higher nor in lower spirits,
never slept less nor more on account of them, nor ate nor drank but
according to his custom.  Haldor was not a man of many words, but
short in conversation, told his opinion bluntly, and was obstinate
and hard: and this could not please the king, who had many clever
people about him, zealous in his service.  Haldor remained a short
time with the king, and then came to Iceland, where he took up his
abode in Hiardaholt, and dwelt in that farm to a very advanced age."
(*)

        (*) Heimskringla, Laing's translation, vol. iii. p. 37.

        The national temper, in the civil history, is not flashy or
whiffling.  The slow, deep English mass smoulders with fire, which at
last sets all its borders in flame.  The wrath of London is not
French wrath, but has a long memory, and, in its hottest heat, a
register and rule.

        Half their strength they put not forth.  They are capable of a
sublime resolution, and if hereafter the war of races, often
predicted, and making itself a war of opinions also (a question of
despotism and liberty coming from Eastern Europe), should menace the
English civilization, these sea-kings may take once again to their
floating castles, and find a new home and a second millennium of
power in their colonies.

        The stability of England is the security of the modern world.
If the English race were as mutable as the French, what reliance?
But the English stand for liberty.  The conservative, money-loving,
lord-loving English are yet liberty-loving; and so freedom is safe:
for they have more personal force than any other people.  The nation
always resist the immoral action of their government.  They think
humanely on the affairs of France, of Turkey, of Poland, of Hungary,
of Schleswig Holstein, though overborne by the statecraft of the
rulers at last.

        Does the early history of each tribe show the permanent bias,
which, though not less potent, is masked, as the tribe spreads its
activity into colonies, commerce, codes, arts, letters?  The early
history shows it, as the musician plays the air which he proceeds to
conceal in a tempest of variations.  In Alfred, in the Northmen, one
may read the genius of the English society, namely, that private life
is the place of honor.  Glory, a career, and ambition, words familiar
to the longitude of Paris, are seldom heard in English speech.
Nelson wrote from their hearts his homely telegraph, "England expects
every man to do his duty."

        For actual service, for the dignity of a profession, or to
appease diseased or inflamed talent, the army and navy may be entered
(the worst boys doing well in the navy); and the civil service, in
departments where serious official work is done; and they hold in
esteem the barrister engaged in the severer studies of the law.  But
the calm, sound, and most British Briton shrinks from public life, as
charlatanism, and respects an economy founded on agriculture,
coal-mines, manufactures, or trade, which secures an independence
through the creation of real values.

        They wish neither to command or obey, but to be kings in their
own houses.  They are intellectual and deeply enjoy literature; they
like well to have the world served up to them in books, maps, models,
and every mode of exact information, and, though not creators in art,
they value its refinement.  They are ready for leisure, can direct
and fill their own day, nor need so much as others the constraint of
a necessity.  But the history of the nation discloses, at every turn,
this original predilection for private independence, and, however
this inclination may have been disturbed by the bribes with which
their vast colonial power has warped men out of orbit, the
inclination endures, and forms and reforms the laws, letters,
manners, and occupations.  They choose that welfare which is
compatible with the commonwealth, knowing that such alone is stable;
as wise merchants prefer investments in the three per cents.

 
        Chapter IX _Cockayne_

        The english are a nation of humorists.  Individual right is
pushed to the uttermost bound compatible with public order.  Property
is so perfect, that it seems the craft of that race, and not to exist
elsewhere.  The king cannot step on an acre which the peasant refuses
to sell.  A testator endows a dog or a rookery, and Europe cannot
interfere with his absurdity.  Every individual has his particular
way of living, which he pushes to folly, and the decided sympathy of
his compatriots is engaged to back up Mr. Crump's whim by statutes,
and chancellors, and horse-guards.  There is no freak so ridiculous
but some Englishman has attempted to immortalize by money and law.
British citizenship is as omnipotent as Roman was.  Mr. Cockayne is
very sensible of this.  The pursy man means by freedom the right to
do as he pleases, and does wrong in order to feel his freedom, and
makes a conscience of persisting in it.

        He is intensely patriotic, for his country is so small.  His
confidence in the power and performance of his nation makes him
provokingly incurious about other nations.  He dislikes foreigners.
Swedenborg, who lived much in England, notes "the similitude of minds
among the English, in consequence of which they contract familiarity
with friends who are of that nation, and seldom with others: and they
regard foreigners, as one looking through a telescope from the top of
a palace regards those who dwell or wander about out of the city." A
much older traveller, the Venetian who wrote the "Relation of
England," (* 1) in 1500, says: -- "The English are great lovers of
themselves, and of every thing belonging to them.  They think that
there are no other men than themselves, and no other world but
England; and, whenever they see a handsome foreigner, they say that
he looks like an Englishman, and it is a great pity he should not be
an Englishman; and whenever they partake of any delicacy with a
foreigner, they ask him whether such a thing is made in his country."
When he adds epithets of praise, his climax is "so English;" and when
he wishes to pay you the highest compliment, he says, I should not
know you from an Englishman.  France is, by its natural contrast, a
kind of blackboard on which English character draws its own traits in
chalk.  This arrogance habitually exhibits itself in allusions to the
French.  I suppose that all men of English blood in America, Europe,
or Asia, have a secret feeling of joy that they are not French
natives.  Mr.  Coleridge is said to have given public thanks to God,
at the close of a lecture, that he had defended him from being able
to utter a single sentence in the French language.  I have found that
Englishmen have such a good opinion of England, that the ordinary
phrases, in all good society, of postponing or disparaging one's own
things in talking with a stranger, are seriously mistaken by them for
an insuppressible homage to the merits of their nation; and the New
Yorker or Pennsylvanian who modestly laments the disadvantage of a
new country, log-huts, and savages, is surprised by the instant and
unfeigned commiseration of the whole company, who plainly account all
the world out of England a heap of rubbish.

        (* 1) Printed by the Camden Society.

        The same insular limitation pinches his foreign politics.  He
sticks to his traditions and usages, and, so help him God! he will
force his island by-laws down the throat of great countries, like
India, China, Canada, Australia, and not only so, but impose Wapping
on the Congress of Vienna, and trample down all nationalities with
his taxed boots.  Lord Chatham goes for liberty, and no taxation
without representation; -- for that is British law; but not a hobnail
shall they dare make in America, but buy their nails in England, --
for that also is British law; and the fact that British commerce was
to be recreated by the independence of America, took them all by
surprise.

        In short, I am afraid that English nature is so rank and
aggressive as to be a little incompatible with every other.  The
world is not wide enough for two.

        But, beyond this nationality, it must be admitted, the island
offers a daily worship to the old Norse god Brage, celebrated among
our Scandinavian forefathers, for his eloquence and majestic air.
The English have a steady courage, that fits them for great attempts
and endurance: they have also a petty courage, through which every
man delights in showing himself for what he is, and in doing what he
can; so that, in all companies, each of them has too good an opinion
of himself to imitate any body.  He hides no defect of his form,
features, dress, connection, or birthplace, for he thinks every
circumstance belonging to him comes recommended to you.  If one of
them have a bald, or a red, or a green head, or bow legs, or a scar,
or mark, or a paunch, or a squeaking or a raven voice, he has
persuaded himself that there is something modish and becoming in it,
and that it sits well on him.

        But nature makes nothing in vain, and this little superfluity
of self-regard in the English brain, is one of the secrets of their
power and history.  For, it sets every man on being and doing what he
really is and can.  It takes away a dodging, skulking, secondary air,
and encourages a frank and manly bearing, so that each man makes the
most of himself, and loses no opportunity for want of pushing.  A
man's personal defects will commonly have with the rest of the world,
precisely that importance which they have to himself.  If he makes
light of them, so will other men.  We all find in these a convenient
meter of character, since a little man would be ruined by the
vexation.  I remember a shrewd politician, in one of our western
cities, told me, "that he had known several successful statesmen made
by their foible." And another, an ex-governor of Illinois, said to
me, "If a man knew any thing, he would sit in a corner and be modest;
but he is such an ignorant peacock, that he goes bustling up and
down, and hits on extraordinary discoveries."

        There is also this benefit in brag, that the speaker is
unconsciously expressing his own ideal.  Humor him by all means, draw
it all out, and hold him to it.  Their culture generally enables the
travelled English to avoid any ridiculous extremes of this
self-pleasing, and to give it an agreeable air.  Then the natural
disposition is fostered by the respect which they find entertained in
the world for English ability.  It was said of Louis XIV., that his
gait and air were becoming enough in so great a monarch, yet would
have been ridiculous in another man; so the prestige of the English
name warrants a certain confident bearing, which a Frenchman or
Belgian could not carry.  At all events, they feel themselves at
liberty to assume the most extraordinary tone on the subject of
English merits.

        An English lady on the Rhine hearing a German speaking of her
party as foreigners, exclaimed, "No, we are not foreigners; we are
English; it is you that are foreigners." They tell you daily, in
London, the story of the Frenchman and Englishman who quarrelled.
Both were unwilling to fight, but their companions put them up to it:
at last, it was agreed, that they should fight alone, in the dark,
and with pistols: the candles were put out, and the Englishman, to
make sure not to hit any body, fired up the chimney, and brought down
the Frenchman.  They have no curiosity about foreigners, and answer
any information you may volunteer with "Oh, Oh!" until the informant
makes up his mind, that they shall die in their ignorance, for any
help he will offer.  There are really no limits to this conceit,
though brighter men among them make painful efforts to be candid.

        The habit of brag runs through all classes, from the Times
newspaper through politicians and poets, through Wordsworth, Carlyle,
Mill, and Sydney Smith, down to the boys of Eton.  In the gravest
treatise on political economy, in a philosophical essay, in books of
science, one is surprised by the most innocent exhibition of
unflinching nationality.  In a tract on Corn, a most amiable and
accomplished gentleman writes thus: -- "Though Britain, according to
Bishop Berkeley's idea, were surrounded by a wall of brass ten
thousand cubits in height, still she would as far excel the rest of
the globe in riches, as she now does, both in this secondary quality,
and in the more important ones of freedom, virtue, and science."
(* 2)

        (* 2) William Spence.

        The English dislike the American structure of society, whilst
yet trade, mills, public education, and chartism are doing what they
can to create in England the same social condition.  America is the
paradise of the economists; is the favorable exception invariably
quoted to the rules of ruin; but when he speaks directly of the
Americans, the islander forgets his philosophy, and remembers his
disparaging anecdotes.

        But this childish patriotism costs something, like all
narrowness.  The English sway of their colonies has no root of
kindness.  They govern by their arts and ability; they are more just
than kind; and, whenever an abatement of their power is felt, they
have not conciliated the affection on which to rely.

        Coarse local distinctions, as those of nation, province, or
town, are useful in the absence of real ones; but we must not insist
on these accidental lines.  Individual traits are always triumphing
over national ones.  There is no fence in metaphysics discriminating
Greek, or English, or Spanish science.  Aesop, and Montaigne,
Cervantes, and Saadi are men of the world; and to wave our own flag
at the dinner table or in the University, is to carry the boisterous
dulness of a fire-club into a polite circle.  Nature and destiny are
always on the watch for our follies.  Nature trips us up when we
strut; and there are curious examples in history on this very point
of national pride.

        George of Cappadocia, born at Epiphania in Cilicia, was a low
parasite, who got a lucrative contract to supply the army with bacon.
A rogue and informer, he got rich, and was forced to run from
justice.  He saved his money, embraced Arianism, collected a library,
and got promoted by a faction to the episcopal throne of Alexandria.
When Julian came, A. D. 361, George was dragged to prison; the prison
was burst open by the mob, and George was lynched, as he deserved.
And this precious knave became, in good time, Saint George of
England, patron of chivalry, emblem of victory and civility, and the
pride of the best blood of the modern world.

        Strange, that the solid truth-speaking Briton should derive
from an impostor.  Strange, that the New World should have no better
luck, -- that broad America must wear the name of a thief.  Amerigo
Vespucci, the pickledealer at Seville, who went out, in 1499, a
subaltern with Hojeda, and whose highest naval rank was boatswain's
mate in an expedition that never sailed, managed in this lying world
to supplant Columbus, and baptize half the earth with his own
dishonest name.  Thus nobody can throw stones.  We are equally badly
off in our founders; and the false pickledealer is an offset to the
false bacon-seller.

 
        Chapter X _Wealth_

        There is no country in which so absolute a homage is paid to
wealth.  In America, there is a toh of shame when a man exhibits the
evidences of large property, as if, after all, it needed apology.
But the Englishman has pure pride in his wealth, and esteems it a
final certificate.  A coarse logic rules throughout all English
souls; -- if you have merit, can you not show it by your good
clothes, and coach, and horses?  How can a man be a gentleman without
a pipe of wine?  Haydon says, "there is a fierce resolution to make
every man live according to the means he possesses." There is a
mixture of religion in it.  They are under the Jewish law, and read
with sonorous emphasis that their days shall be long in the land,
they shall have sons and daughters, flocks and herds, wine and oil.
In exact proportion, is the reproach of poverty.  They do not wish to
be represented except by opulent men.  An Englishman who has lost his
fortune, is said to have died of a broken heart.  The last term of
insult is, "a beggar." Nelson said, "the want of fortune is a crime
which I can never get over." Sydney Smith said, "poverty is infamous
in England." And one of their recent writers speaks, in reference to
a private and scholastic life, of "the grave moral deterioration
which follows an empty exchequer." You shall find this sentiment, if
not so frankly put, yet deeply implied, in the novels and romances of
the present century, and not only in these, but in biography, and in
the votes of public assemblies, in the tone of the preaching, and in
the table-talk.

        I was lately turning over Wood's _Athenae Oxonienses_, and
looking naturally for another standard in a chronicle of the scholars
of Oxford for two hundred years.  But I found the two disgraces in
that, as in most English books, are, first, disloyalty to Church and
State, and, second, to be born poor, or to come to poverty.  A
natural fruit of England is the brutal political economy.  Malthus
finds no cover laid at nature's table for the laborer's son.  In
1809, the majority in Parliament expressed itself by the language of
Mr. Fuller in the House of Commons, "if you do not like the country,
damn you, you can leave it." When Sir S. Romilly proposed his bill
forbidding parish officers to bind children apprentices at a greater
distance than forty miles from their home, Peel opposed, and Mr.
Wortley said, "though, in the higher ranks, to cultivate family
affections was a good thing, 'twas not so among the lower orders.
Better take them away from those who might deprave them.  And it was
highly injurious to trade to stop binding to manufacturers, as it
must raise the price of labor, and of manufactured goods."

        The respect for truth of facts in England, is equalled only by
the respect for wealth.  It is at once the pride of art of the Saxon,
as he is a wealth-maker, and his passion for independence.  The
Englishman believes that every man must take care of himself, and has
himself to thank, if he do not mend his condition.  To pay their
debts is their national point of honor.  From the Exchequer and the
East India House to the huckster's shop, every thing prospers,
because it is solvent.  The British armies are solvent, and pay for
what they take.  The British empire is solvent; for, in spite of the
huge national debt, the valuation mounts.  During the war from 1789
to 1815, whilst they complained that they were taxed within an inch
of their lives, and, by dint of enormous taxes, were subsidizing all
the continent against France, the English were growing rich every
year faster than any people ever grew before.  It is their maxim,
that the weight of taxes must be calculated not by what is taken, but
by what is left.  Solvency is in the ideas and mechanism of an
Englishman.  The Crystal Palace is not considered honest until it
pays; -- no matter how much convenience, beauty, or eclat, it must be
self-supporting.  They are contented with slower steamers, as long as
they know that swifter boats lose money.  They proceed logically by
the double method of labor and thrift.  Every household exhibits an
exact economy, and nothing of that uncalculated headlong expenditure
which families use in America.  If they cannot pay, they do not buy;
for they have no presumption of better fortunes next year, as our
people have; and they say without shame, I cannot afford it.
Gentlemen do not hesitate to ride in the second-class cars, or in the
second cabin.  An economist, or a man who can proportion his means
and his ambition, or bring the year round with expenditure which
expresses his character, without embarrassing one day of his future,
is already a master of life, and a freeman.  Lord Burleigh writes to
his son, "that one ought never to devote more than two thirds of his
income to the ordinary expenses of life, since the extraordinary will
be certain to absorb the other third."

        The ambition to create value evokes every kind of ability,
government becomes a manufacturing corporation, and every house a
mill.  The headlong bias to utility will let no talent lie in a
napkin, -- if possible, will teach spiders to weave silk stockings.
An Englishman, while he eats and drinks no more, or not much more
than another man, labors three times as many hours in the course of a
year, as any other European; or, his life as a workman is three
lives.  He works fast.  Every thing in England is at a quick pace.
They have reinforced their own productivity, by the creation of that
marvellous machinery which differences this age from any other age.

        'Tis a curious chapter in modern history, the growth of the
machine-shop.  Six hundred years ago, Roger Bacon explained the precession of
the equinoxes, the consequent necessity of the reform of the calendar;
measured the length of the year, invented gunpowder; and announced, (as if
looking from his lofty cell, over five centuries, into ours,) "that machines
can be constructed to drive ships more rapidly than a whole galley of rowers
could do; nor would they need any thing but a pilot to steer them.  Carriages
also might be constructed to move with an incredible speed, without the aid
of any animal.  Finally, it would not be impossible to make machines, which,
by means of a suit of wings, should fly in the air in the manner of birds."
But the secret slept with Bacon.  The six hundred years have not yet
fulfilled his words.  Two centuries ago, the sawing of timber was done by
hand; the carriage wheels ran on wooden axles; the land was tilled by wooden
ploughs.  And it was to little purpose, that they had pit-coal, or that looms
were improved, unless Watt and Stephenson had taught them to work force-pumps
and power-looms, by steam.  The great strides were all taken within the last
hundred years.  The Life of Sir Robert Peel, who died, the other day, the
model Englishman, very properly has, for a frontispiece a drawing of the
spinning-jenny, which wove the web of his fortunes.  Hargreaves invented the
spinning-jenny, and died in a workhouse.  Arkwright improved the invention;
and the machine dispensed with the work of ninety-nine men: that is, one
spinner could do as much work as one hundred had done before.  The loom was
improved further.  But the men would sometimes strike for wages, and combine
against the masters, and, about 1829-30, much fear was felt, lest the trade
would be drawn away by these interruptions, and the emigration of the
spinners, to Belgium and the United States.  Iron and steel are very
obedient.  Whether it were not possible to make a spinner that would not
rebel, nor mutter, nor scowl, nor strike for wages, nor emigrate?  At the
solicitation of the masters, after a mob and riot at Staley Bridge, Mr.
Roberts of Manchester undertook to create this peaceful fellow, instead of
the quarrelsome fellow God had made.  After a few trials, he succeeded, and,
in 1830, procured a patent for his self-acting mule; a creation, the delight
of mill-owners, and "destined," they said, "to restore order among the
industrious classes"; a machine requiring only a child's hand to piece the
broken yarns.  As Arkwright had destroyed domestic spinning, so Roberts
destroyed the factory spinner.  The power of machinery in Great Britain, in
mills, has been computed to be equal to 600,000,000 men, one man being able
by the aid of steam to do the work which required two hundred and fifty men
to accomplish fifty years ago.  The production has been commensurate.
England already had this laborious race, rich soil, water, wood, coal, iron,
and favorable climate.  Eight hundred years ago, commerce had made it rich,
and it was recorded, "England is the richest of all the northern nations."
The Norman historians recite, that "in 1067, William carried with him into
Normandy, from England, more gold and silver than had ever before been seen
in Gaul." But when, to this labor and trade, and these native resources was
added this goblin of steam, with his myriad arms, never tired, working night
and day everlastingly, the amassing of property has run out of all figures.
It makes the motor of the last ninety years.  The steampipe has added to her
population and wealth the equivalent of four or five Englands.  Forty
thousand ships are entered in Lloyd's lists.  The yield of wheat has gone on
from 2,000,000 quarters in the time of the Stuarts, to 13,000,000 in 1854.  A
thousand million of pounds sterling are said to compose the floating money of
commerce.  In 1848, Lord John Russell stated that the people of this country
had laid out 300,000,000 pounds of capital in railways, in the last four
years.  But a better measure than these sounding figures, is the estimate,
that there is wealth enough in England to support the entire population in
idleness for one year.

        The wise, versatile, all-giving machinery makes chisels, roads,
locomotives, telegraphs.  Whitworth divides a bar to a millionth of
an inch.  Steam twines huge cannon into wreaths, as easily as it
braids straw, and vies with the volcanic forces which twisted the
strata.  It can clothe shingle mountains with ship-oaks, make
sword-blades that will cut gun-barrels in two.  In Egypt, it can
plant forests, and bring rain after three thousand years.  Already it
is ruddering the balloon, and the next war will be fought in the air.
But another machine more potent in England than steam, is the Bank.
It votes an issue of bills, population is stimulated, and cities
rise; it refuses loans, and emigration empties the country; trade
sinks; revolutions break out; kings are dethroned.  By these new
agents our social system is moulded.  By dint of steam and of money,
war and commerce are changed.  Nations have lost their old
omnipotence; the patriotic tie does not hold.  Nations are getting
obsolete, we go and live where we will.  Steam has enabled men to
choose what law they will live under.  Money makes place for them.
The telegraph is a limp-band that will hold the Fenris-wolf of war.
For now, that a telegraph line runs through France and Europe, from
London, every message it transmits makes stronger by one thread, the
band which war will have to cut.

        The introduction of these elements gives new resources to
existing proprietors.  A sporting duke may fancy that the state
depends on the House of Lords, but the engineer sees, that every
stroke of the steam-piston gives value to the duke's land, fills it
with tenants; doubles, quadruples, centuples the duke's capital, and
creates new measures and new necessities for the culture of his
children.  Of course, it draws the nobility into the competition as
stockholders in the mine, the canal, the railway, in the application
of steam to agriculture, and sometimes into trade.  But it also
introduces large classes into the same competition; the old energy of
the Norse race arms itself with these magnificent powers; new men
prove an over-match for the land-owner, and the mill buys out the
castle.  Scandinavian Thor, who once forged his bolts in icy Hecla,
and built galleys by lonely fiords; in England, has advanced with the
times, has shorn his beard, enters Parliament, sits down at a desk in
the India House, and lends Miollnir to Birmingham for a steam-hammer.

        The creation of wealth in England in the last ninety years, is
a main fact in modern history.  The wealth of London determines
prices all over the globe.  All things precious, or useful, or
amusing, or intoxicating, are sucked into this commerce and floated
to London.  Some English private fortunes reach, and some exceed a
million of dollars a year.  A hundred thousand palaces adorn the
island.  All that can feed the senses and passions, all that can
succor the talent, or arm the hands of the intelligent middle class,
who never spare in what they buy for their own consumption; all that
can aid science, gratify taste, or soothe comfort, is in open market.
Whatever is excellent and beautiful in civil, rural, or ecclesiastic
architecture; in fountain, garden, or grounds; the English noble
crosses sea and land to see and to copy at home.  The taste and
science of thirty peaceful generations; the gardens which Evelyn
planted; the temples and pleasure-houses which Inigo Jones and
Christopher Wren built; the wood that Gibbons carved; the taste of
foreign and domestic artists, Shenstone, Pope, Brown, Loudon, Paxton,
are in the vast auction, and the hereditary principle heaps on the
owner of to-day the benefit of ages of owners.  The present
possessors are to the full as absolute as any of their fathers, in
choosing and procuring what they like.  This comfort and splendor,
the breadth of lake and mountain, tillage, pasture, and park,
sumptuous castle and modern villa, -- all consist with perfect order.
They have no revolutions; no horse-guards dictating to the crown; no
Parisian _poissardes_ and barricades; no mob: but drowsy habitude,
daily dress-dinners, wine, and ale, and beer, and gin, and sleep.

        With this power of creation, and this passion for independence,
property has reached an ideal perfection.  It is felt and treated as
the national life-blood.  The laws are framed to give property the
securest possible basis, and the provisions to lock and transmit it
have exercised the cunningest heads in a profession which never
admits a fool.  The rights of property nothing but felony and treason
can override.  The house is a castle which the king cannot enter.
The Bank is a strong box to which the king has no key.  Whatever
surly sweetness possession can give, is tested in England to the
dregs.  Vested rights are awful things, and absolute possession gives
the smallest freeholder identity of interest with the duke.  High
stone fences, and padlocked garden-gates announce the absolute will
of the owner to be alone.  Every whim of exaggerated egotism is put
into stone and iron, into silver and gold, with costly deliberation
and detail.

        An Englishman hears that the Queen Dowager wishes to establish
some claim to put her park paling a rod forward into his grounds, so
as to get a coachway, and save her a mile to the avenue.  Instantly
he transforms his paling into stone-masonry, solid as the walls of
Cuma, and all Europe cannot prevail on him to sell or compound for an
inch of the land.  They delight in a freak as the proof of their
sovereign freedom.  Sir Edward Boynton, at Spic Park, at Cadenham, on
a precipice of incomparable prospect, built a house like a long barn,
which had not a window on the prospect side.  Strawberry Hill of
Horace Walpole, Fonthill Abbey of Mr. Beckford, were freaks; and
Newstead Abbey became one in the hands of Lord Byron.

        But the proudest result of this creation has been the great and
refined forces it has put at the disposal of the private citizen.  In
the social world, an Englishman to-day has the best lot.  He is a
king in a plain coat.  He goes with the most powerful protection,
keeps the best company, is armed by the best education, is seconded
by wealth; and his English name and accidents are like a flourish of
trumpets announcing him.  This, with his quiet style of manners,
gives him the power of a sovereign, without the inconveniences which
belong to that rank.  I much prefer the condition of an English
gentleman of the better class, to that of any potentate in Europe, --
whether for travel, or for opportunity of society, or for access to
means of science or study, or for mere comfort and easy healthy
relation to people at home.

        Such as we have seen is the wealth of England, a mighty mass,
and made good in whatever details we care to explore.  The cause and
spring of it is the wealth of temperament in the people.  The wonder
of Britain is this plenteous nature.  Her worthies are ever
surrounded by as good men as themselves; each is a captain a hundred
strong, and that wealth of men is represented again in the faculty of
each individual, -- that he has waste strength, power to spare.  The
English are so rich, and seem to have established a tap-root in the
bowels of the planet, because they are constitutionally fertile and
creative.

        But a man must keep an eye on his servants, if he would not
have them rule him.  Man is a shrewd inventor, and is ever taking the
hint of a new machine from his own structure, adapting some secret of
his own anatomy in iron, wood, and leather, to some required function
in the work of the world.  But it is found that the machine unmans
the user.  What he gains in making cloth, he loses in general power.
There should be temperance in making cloth, as well as in eating.  A
man should not be a silk-worm; nor a nation a tent of caterpillars.
The robust rural Saxon degenerates in the mills to the Leicester
stockinger, to the imbecile Manchester spinner, -- far on the way to
be spiders and needles.  The incessant repetition of the same
hand-work dwarfs the man, robs him of his strength, wit, and
versatility, to make a pin-polisher, a buckle-maker, or any other
specialty; and presently, in a change of industry, whole towns are
sacrificed like ant-hills, when the fashion of shoe-strings
supersedes buckles, when cotton takes the place of linen, or railways
of turnpikes, or when commons are inclosed by landlords.  Then
society is admonished of the mischief of the division of labor, and
that the best political economy is care and culture of men; for, in
these crises, all are ruined except such as are proper individuals,
capable of thought, and of new choice and the application of their
talent to new labor.  Then again come in new calamities.  England is
aghast at the disclosure of her fraud in the adulteration of food, of
drugs, and of almost every fabric in her mills and shops; finding
that milk will not nourish, nor sugar sweeten, nor bread satisfy, nor
pepper bite the tongue, nor glue stick.  In true England all is false
and forged.  This too is the reaction of machinery, but of the larger
machinery of commerce.  'Tis not, I suppose, want of probity, so much
as the tyranny of trade, which necessitates a perpetual competition
of underselling, and that again a perpetual deterioration of the
fabric.

        The machinery has proved, like the balloon, unmanageable, and
flies away with the aeronaut.  Steam, from the first, hissed and
screamed to warn him; it was dreadful with its explosion, and crushed
the engineer.  The machinist has wrought and watched, engineers and
firemen without number have been sacrificed in learning to tame and
guide the monster.  But harder still it has proved to resist and rule
the dragon Money, with his paper wings.  Chancellors and Boards of
Trade, Pitt, Peel, and Robinson, and their Parliaments, and their
whole generation, adopted false principles, and went to their graves
in the belief that they were enriching the country which they were
impoverishing.  They congratulated each other on ruinous expedients.
It is rare to find a merchant who knows why a crisis occurs in trade,
why prices rise or fall, or who knows the mischief of paper money.
In the culmination of national prosperity, in the annexation of
countries; building of ships, depots, towns; in the influx of tons of
gold and silver; amid the chuckle of chancellors and financiers, it
was found that bread rose to famine prices, that the yeoman was
forced to sell his cow and pig, his tools, and his acre of land; and
the dreadful barometer of the poor-rates was touching the point of
ruin.  The poor-rate was sucking in the solvent classes, and forcing
an exodus of farmers and mechanics.  What befals from the violence of
financial crises, befals daily in the violence of artificial
legislation.

        Such a wealth has England earned, ever new, bounteous, and
augmenting.  But the question recurs, does she take the step beyond,
namely, to the wise use, in view of the supreme wealth of nations?
We estimate the wisdom of nations by seeing what they did with their
surplus capital.  And, in view of these injuries, some compensation
has been attempted in England.  A part of the money earned returns to
the brain to buy schools, libraries, bishops, astronomers, chemists,
and artists with; and a part to repair the wrongs of this intemperate
weaving, by hospitals, savings-banks, Mechanics' Institutes, public
grounds, and other charities and amenities.  But the antidotes are
frightfully inadequate, and the evil requires a deeper cure, which
time and a simpler social organization must supply.  At present, she
does not rule her wealth.  She is simply a good England, but no
divinity, or wise and instructed soul.  She too is in the stream of
fate, one victim more in a common catastrophe.

        But being in the fault, she has the misfortune of greatness to
be held as the chief offender.  England must be held responsible for
the despotism of expense.  Her prosperity, the splendor which so much
manhood and talent and perseverance has thrown upon vulgar aims, is
the very argument of materialism.  Her success strengthens the hands
of base wealth.  Who can propose to youth poverty and wisdom, when
mean gain has arrived at the conquest of letters and arts; when
English success has grown out of the very renunciation of principles,
and the dedication to outsides?  A civility of trifles, of money and
expense, an erudition of sensation takes place, and the putting as
many impediments as we can, between the man and his objects.  Hardly
the bravest among them have the manliness to resist it successfully.
Hence, it has come, that not the aims of a manly life, but the means
of meeting a certain ponderous expense, is that which is to be
considered by a youth in England, emerging from his minority.  A
large family is reckoned a misfortune.  And it is a consolation in
the death of the young, that a source of expense is closed.

 
 
        Chapter XI _Aristocracy_

        The feudal character of the English state, now that it is
getting obsolete, glares a little, in contrast with the democratic
tendencies.  The inequality of power and property shocks republican
nerves.  Palaces, halls, villas, walled parks, all over England,
rival the splendor of royal seats.  Many of the halls, like Haddon,
or Kedleston, are beautiful desolations.  The proprietor never saw
them, or never lived in them.  Primogeniture built these sumptuous
piles, and, I suppose, it is the sentiment of every traveller, as it
was mine, 'Twas well to come ere these were gone.  Primogeniture is a
cardinal rule of English property and institutions.  Laws, customs,
manners, the very persons and faces, affirm it.

        The frame of society is aristocratic, the taste of the people
is loyal.  The estates, names, and manners of the nobles flatter the
fancy of the people, and conciliate the necessary support.  In spite
of broken faith, stolen charters, and the devastation of society by
the profligacy of the court, we take sides as we read for the loyal
England and King Charles's "return to his right" with his Cavaliers,
-- knowing what a heartless trifler he is, and what a crew of
God-forsaken robbers they are.  The people of England knew as much.
But the fair idea of a settled government connecting itself with
heraldic names, with the written and oral history of Europe, and, at
last, with the Hebrew religion, and the oldest traditions of the
world, was too pleasing a vision to be shattered by a few offensive
realities, and the politics of shoemakers and costermongers.  The
hopes of the commoners take the same direction with the interest of
the patricians.  Every man who becomes rich buys land, and does what
he can to fortify the nobility, into which he hopes to rise.  The
Anglican clergy are identified with the aristocracy.  Time and law
have made the joining and moulding perfect in every part.  The
Cathedrals, the Universities, the national music, the popular
romances, conspire to uphold the heraldry, which the current politics
of the day are sapping.  The taste of the people is conservative.
They are proud of the castles, and of the language and symbol of
chivalry.  Even the word lord is the luckiest style that is used in
any language to designate a patrician.  The superior education and
manners of the nobles recommend them to the country.

        The Norwegian pirate got what he could, and held it for his
eldest son.  The Norman noble, who was the Norwegian pirate baptized,
did likewise.  There was this advantage of western over oriental
nobility, that this was recruited from below.  English history is
aristocracy with the doors open.  Who has courage and faculty, let
him come in.  Of course, the terms of admission to this club are hard
and high.  The selfishness of the nobles comes in aid of the interest
of the nation to require signal merit.  Piracy and war gave place to
trade, politics, and letters; the war-lord to the law-lord; the
law-lord to the merchant and the mill-owner; but the privilege was
kept, whilst the means of obtaining it were changed.

        The foundations of these families lie deep in Norwegian
exploits by sea, and Saxon sturdiness on land.  All nobility in its
beginnings was somebody's natural superiority.  The things these
English have done were not done without peril of life, nor without
wisdom and conduct; and the first hands, it may be presumed, were
often challenged to show their right to their honors, or yield them
to better men.  "He that will be a head, let him be a bridge," said
the Welsh chief Benegridran, when he carried all his men over the
river on his back.  "He shall have the book," said the mother of
Alfred, "who can read it;" and Alfred won it by that title: and I
make no doubt that feudal tenure was no sinecure, but baron, knight,
and tenant, often had their memories refreshed, in regard to the
service by which they held their lands.  The De Veres, Bohuns,
Mowbrays, and Plantagenets were not addicted to contemplation.  The
middle age adorned itself with proofs of manhood and devotion.  Of
Richard Beauchamp, Earl of Warwick, the Emperor told Henry V. that no
Christian king had such another knight for wisdom, nurture, and
manhood, and caused him to be named, "Father of curtesie." "Our
success in France," says the historian, "lived and died with him."
(* 1)

        (* 1) Fuller's Worthies.  II. p. 472.

        The war-lord earned his honors, and no donation of land was
large, as long as it brought the duty of protecting it, hour by hour,
against a terrible enemy.  In France and in England, the nobles were,
down to a late day, born and bred to war: and the duel, which in
peace still held them to the risks of war, diminished the envy that,
in trading and studious nations, would else have pried into their
title.  They were looked on as men who played high for a great stake.

        Great estates are not sinecures, if they are to be kept great.
A creative economy is the fuel of magnificence.  In the same line of
Warwick, the successor next but one to Beauchamp, was the stout earl
of Henry VI.  and Edward IV.  Few esteemed themselves in the mode,
whose heads were not adorned with the black ragged staff, his badge.
At his house in London, six oxen were daily eaten at a breakfast; and
every tavern was full of his meat; and who had any acquaintance in
his family, should have as much boiled and roast as he could carry on
a long dagger.

        The new age brings new qualities into request, the virtues of
pirates gave way to those of planters, merchants, senators, and
scholars.  Comity, social talent, and fine manners, no doubt, have
had their part also.  I have met somewhere with a historiette, which,
whether more or less true in its particulars, carries a general
truth.  "How came the Duke of Bedford by his great landed estates?
His ancestor having travelled on the continent, a lively, pleasant
man, became the companion of a foreign prince wrecked on the
Dorsetshire coast, where Mr. Russell lived.  The prince recommended
him to Henry VIII., who, liking his company, gave him a large share
of the plundered church lands."

        The pretence is that the noble is of unbroken descent from the
Norman, and has never worked for eight hundred years.  But the fact
is otherwise.  Where is Bohun? where is De Vere?  The lawyer, the
farmer, the silkmercer lies _perdu_ under the coronet, and winks to
the antiquary to say nothing; especially skilful lawyers, nobody's
sons, who did some piece of work at a nice moment for government, and
were rewarded with ermine.

        The national tastes of the English do not lead them to the life
of the courtier, but to secure the comfort and independence of their
homes.  The aristocracy are marked by their predilection for
country-life.  They are called the county-families.  They have often
no residence in London, and only go thither a short time, during the
season, to see the opera; but they concentrate the love and labor of
many generations on the building, planting and decoration of their
homesteads.  Some of them are too old and too proud to wear titles,
or, as Sheridan said of Coke, "disdain to hide their head in a
coronet;" and some curious examples are cited to show the stability
of English families.  Their proverb is, that, fifty miles from
London, a family will last a hundred years; at a hundred miles, two
hundred years; and so on; but I doubt that steam, the enemy of time,
as well as of space, will disturb these ancient rules.  Sir Henry
Wotton says of the first Duke of Buckingham, "He was born at Brookeby
in Leicestershire, where his ancestors had chiefly continued about
the space of four hundred years, rather without obscurity, than with
any great lustre." (* 2) Wraxall says, that, in 1781, Lord Surrey,
afterwards Duke of Norfolk, told him, that when the year 1783 should
arrive, he meant to give a grand festival to all the descendants of
the body of Jockey of Norfolk, to mark the day when the dukedom
should have remained three hundred years in their house, since its
creation by Richard III.  Pepys tells us, in writing of an Earl
Oxford, in 1666, that the honor had now remained in that name and
blood six hundred years.

        (* 2) Reliquiae Wottonianae, p. 208.

        This long descent of families and this cleaving through ages to
the same spot of ground captivates the imagination.  It has too a
connection with the names of the towns and districts of the country.

        The names are excellent, -- an atmosphere of legendary melody
spread over the land.  Older than all epics and histories, which
clothe a nation, this undershirt sits close to the body.  What
history too, and what stores of primitive and savage observation it
infolds!  Cambridge is the bridge of the Cam; Sheffield the field of
the river Sheaf; Leicester the _castra_ or camp of the Lear or Leir
(now Soar); Rochdale, of the Roch; Exeter or Excester, the _castra_
of the Ex; Exmouth, Dartmouth, Sidmouth, Teignmouth, the mouths of
the Ex, Dart, Sid, and Teign rivers.  Waltham is strong town;
Radcliffe is red cliff; and so on: -- a sincerity and use in naming
very striking to an American, whose country is whitewashed all over
by unmeaning names, the cast-off clothes of the country from which
its emigrants came; or, named at a pinch from a psalm-tune.  But the
English are those "barbarians" of Jamblichus, who "are stable in
their manners, and firmly continue to employ the same words, which
also are dear to the gods."

        'Tis an old sneer, that the Irish peerage drew their names from
playbooks.  The English lords do not call their lands after their own
names, but call themselves after their lands; as if the man
represented the country that bred him; and they rightly wear the
token of the glebe that gave them birth; suggesting that the tie is
not cut, but that there in London, -- the crags of Argyle, the kail
of Cornwall, the downs of Devon, the iron of Wales, the clays of
Stafford, are neither forgetting nor forgotten, but know the man who
was born by them, and who, like the long line of his fathers, has
carried that crag, that shore, dale, fen, or woodland, in his blood
and manners.  It has, too, the advantage of suggesting
responsibleness.  A susceptible man could not wear a name which
represented in a strict sense a city or a county of England, without
hearing in it a challenge to duty and honor.

        The predilection of the patricians for residence in the
country, combined with the degree of liberty possessed by the
peasant, makes the safety of the English hall.  Mirabeau wrote
prophetically from England, in 1784, "If revolution break out in
France, I tremble for the aristocracy: their chateaux will be reduced
to ashes, and their blood spilt in torrents.  The English tenant
would defend his lord to the last extremity." The English go to their
estates for grandeur.  The French live at court, and exile themselves
to their estates for economy.  As they do not mean to live with their
tenants, they do not conciliate them, but wring from them the last
sous.  Evelyn writes from Blois, in 1644, "The wolves are here in
such numbers, that they often come and take children out of the
streets: yet will not the Duke, who is sovereign here, permit them to
be destroyed."

        In evidence of the wealth amassed by ancient families, the
traveller is shown the palaces in Piccadilly, Burlington House,
Devonshire House, Lansdowne House in Berkshire Square, and, lower
down in the city, a few noble houses which still withstand in all
their amplitude the encroachment of streets.  The Duke of Bedford
includes or included a mile square in the heart of London, where the
British Museum, once Montague House, now stands, and the land
occupied by Woburn Square, Bedford Square, Russell Square.  The
Marquis of Westminster built within a few years the series of squares
called Belgravia.  Stafford House is the noblest palace in London.
Northumberland House holds its place by Charing Cross.  Chesterfield
House remains in Audley Street.  Sion House and Holland House are in
the suburbs.  But most of the historical houses are masked or lost in
the modern uses to which trade or charity has converted them.  A
multitude of town palaces contain inestimable galleries of art.

        In the country, the size of private estates is more impressive.
From Barnard Castle I rode on the highway twenty-three miles from
High Force, a fall of the Tees, towards Darlington, past Raby Castle,
through the estate of the Duke of Cleveland.  The Marquis of
Breadalbane rides out of his house a hundred miles in a straight line
to the sea, on his own property.  The Duke of Sutherland owns the
county of Sutherland, stretching across Scotland from sea to sea.
The Duke of Devonshire, besides his other estates, owns 96,000 acres
in the County of Derby.  The Duke of Richmond has 40,000 acres at
Goodwood, and 300,000 at Gordon Castle.  The Duke of Norfolk's park
in Sussex is fifteen miles in circuit.  An agriculturist bought
lately the island of Lewes, in Hebrides, containing 500,000 acres.
The possessions of the Earl of Lonsdale gave him eight seats in
Parliament.  This is the Heptarchy again: and before the Reform of
1832, one hundred and fifty-four persons sent three hundred and seven
members to Parliament.  The borough-mongers governed England.

        These large domains are growing larger.  The great estates are
absorbing the small freeholds.  In 1786, the soil of England was
owned by 250,000 corporations and proprietors; and, in 1822, by
32,000.  These broad estates find room in this narrow island.  All
over England, scattered at short intervals among ship-yards, mills,
mines, and forges, are the paradises of the nobles, where the
livelong repose and refinement are heightened by the contrast with
the roar of industry and necessity, out of which you have stepped
aside.

        I was surprised to observe the very small attendance usually in
the House of Lords.  Out of 573 peers, on ordinary days, only twenty
or thirty.  Where are they?  I asked.  "At home on their estates,
devoured by _ennui_, or in the Alps, or up the Rhine, in the Harz
Mountains, or in Egypt, or in India, on the Ghauts." But, with such
interests at stake, how can these men afford to neglect them?  "O,"
replied my friend, "why should they work for themselves, when every
man in England works for them, and will suffer before they come to
harm?" The hardest radical instantly uncovers, and changes his tone
to a lord.  It was remarked, on the 10th April, 1848, (the day of the
Chartist demonstration,) that the upper classes were, for the first
time, actively interesting themselves in their own defence, and men
of rank were sworn special constables, with the rest.  "Besides, why
need they sit out the debate?  Has not the Duke of Wellington, at
this moment, their proxies, -- the proxies of fifty peers in his
pocket, to vote for them, if there be an emergency?"

        It is however true, that the existence of the House of Peers as
a branch of the government entitles them to fill half the Cabinet;
and their weight of property and station give them a virtual
nomination of the other half; whilst they have their share in the
subordinate offices, as a school of training.  This monopoly of
political power has given them their intellectual and social eminence
in Europe.  A few law lords and a few political lords take the brunt
of public business.  In the army, the nobility fill a large part of
the high commissions, and give to these a tone of expense and
splendor, and also of exclusiveness.  They have borne their full
share of duty and danger in this service; and there are few noble
families which have not paid in some of their members, the debt of
life or limb, in the sacrifices of the Russian war.  For the rest,
the nobility have the lead in matters of state, and of expense; in
questions of taste, in social usages, in convivial and domestic
hospitalities.  In general, all that is required of them is to sit
securely, to preside at public meetings, to countenance charities,
and to give the example of that decorum so dear to the British heart.

 
        If one asks, in the critical spirit of the day, what service
this class have rendered? -- uses appear, or they would have perished
long ago.  Some of these are easily enumerated, others more subtle
make a part of unconscious history.  Their institution is one step in
the progress of society.  For a race yields a nobility in some form,
however we name the lords, as surely as it yields women.

        The English nobles are high-spirited, active, educated men,
born to wealth and power, who have run through every country, and
kept in every country the best company, have seen every secret of art
and nature, and, when men of any ability or ambition, have been
consulted in the conduct of every important action.  You cannot wield
great agencies without lending yourself to them, and, when it happens
that the spirit of the earl meets his rank and duties, we have the
best examples of behavior.  Power of any kind readily appears in the
manners; and beneficent power, _le talent de bien faire_, gives a
majesty which cannot be concealed or resisted.

        These people seem to gain as much as they lose by their
position.  They survey society, as from the top of St. Paul's, and,
if they never hear plain truth from men, they see the best of every
thing, in every kind, and they see things so grouped and amassed as
to infer easily the sum and genius, instead of tedious
particularities.  Their good behavior deserves all its fame, and they
have that simplicity, and that air of repose, which are the finest
ornament of greatness.

        The upper classes have only birth, say the people here, and not
thoughts.  Yes, but they have manners, and, 'tis wonderful, how much
talent runs into manners: -- nowhere and never so much as in England.
They have the sense of superiority, the absence of all the ambitious
effort which disgusts in the aspiring classes, a pure tone of thought
and feeling, and the power to command, among their other luxuries,
the presence of the most accomplished men in their festive meetings.

        Loyalty is in the English a sub-religion.  They wear the laws
as ornaments, and walk by their faith in their painted May-Fair, as
if among the forms of gods.  The economist of 1855 who asks, of what
use are the lords? may learn of Franklin to ask, of what use is a
baby?  They have been a social church proper to inspire sentiments
mutually honoring the lover and the loved.  Politeness is the ritual
of society, as prayers are of the church; a school of manners, and a
gentle blessing to the age in which it grew.  'Tis a romance adorning
English life with a larger horizon; a midway heaven, fulfilling to
their sense their fairy tales and poetry.  This, just as far as the
breeding of the nobleman really made him brave, handsome,
accomplished, and great-hearted.

        On general grounds, whatever tends to form manners, or to
finish men, has a great value.  Every one who has tasted the delight
of friendship, will respect every social guard which our manners can
establish, tending to secure from the intrusion of frivolous and
distasteful people.  The jealousy of every class to guard itself, is
a testimony to the reality they have found in life.  When a man once
knows that he has done justice to himself, let him dismiss all
terrors of aristocracy as superstitions, so far as he is concerned.
He who keeps the door of a mine, whether of cobalt, or mercury, or
nickel, or plumbago, securely knows that the world cannot do without
him.  Every body who is real is open and ready for that which is also
real.

        Besides, these are they who make England that strongbox and
museum it is; who gather and protect works of art, dragged from
amidst burning cities and revolutionary countries, and brought hither
out of all the world.  I look with respect at houses six, seven,
eight hundred, or, like Warwick Castle, nine hundred years old.  I
pardoned high park-fences, when I saw, that, besides does and
pheasants, these have preserved Arundel marbles, Townley galleries,
Howard and Spenserian libraries, Warwick and Portland vases, Saxon
manuscripts, monastic architectures, millennial trees, and breeds of
cattle elsewhere extinct.  In these manors, after the frenzy of war
and destruction subsides a little, the antiquary finds the frailest
Roman jar, or crumbling Egyptian mummy-case, without so much as a new
layer of dust, keeping the series of history unbroken, and waiting
for its interpreter, who is sure to arrive.  These lords are the
treasurers and librarians of mankind, engaged by their pride and
wealth to this function.

        Yet there were other works for British dukes to do.  George
Loudon, Quintinye, Evelyn, had taught them to make gardens.  Arthur
Young, Bakewell, and Mechi, have made them agricultural.  Scotland
was a camp until the day of Culloden.  The Dukes of Athol,
Sutherland, Buccleugh, and the Marquis of Breadalbane have introduced
the rape-culture, the sheep-farm, wheat, drainage, the plantation of
forests, the artificial replenishment of lakes and ponds with fish,
the renting of game-preserves.  Against the cry of the old tenantry,
and the sympathetic cry of the English press, they have rooted out
and planted anew, and now six millions of people live, and live
better on the same land that fed three millions.

        The English barons, in every period, have been brave and great,
after the estimate and opinion of their times.  The grand old halls
scattered up and down in England, are dumb vouchers to the state and
broad hospitality of their ancient lords.  Shakspeare's portraits of
good duke Humphrey, of Warwick, of Northumberland, of Talbot, were
drawn in strict consonance with the traditions.  A sketch of the Earl
of Shrewsbury, from the pen of Queen Elizabeth's archbishop Parker;
(* 3) Lord Herbert of Cherbury's autobiography; the letters and
essays of Sir Philip Sidney; the anecdotes preserved by the
antiquaries Fuller and Collins; some glimpses at the interiors of
noble houses, which we owe to Pepys and Evelyn; the details which Ben
Jonson's masques (performed at Kenilworth, Althorpe, Belvoir, and
other noble houses,) record or suggest; down to Aubrey's passages of
the life of Hobbes in the house of the Earl of Devon, are favorable
pictures of a romantic style of manners.  Penshurst still shines for
us, and its Christmas revels, "where logs not burn, but men." At
Wilton House, the "Arcadia" was written, amidst conversations with
Fulke Greville, Lord Brooke, a man of no vulgar mind, as his own
poems declare him.  I must hold Ludlow Castle an honest house, for
which Milton's "Comus" was written, and the company nobly bred which
performed it with knowledge and sympathy.  In the roll of nobles, are
found poets, philosophers, chemists, astronomers, also men of solid
virtues and of lofty sentiments; often they have been the friends and
patrons of genius and learning, and especially of the fine arts; and
at this moment, almost every great house has its sumptuous
picture-gallery.

        (* 3) Dibdin's Literary Reminiscences, vol. 1, xii.
 
        Of course, there is another side to this gorgeous show.  Every
victory was the defect of a party only less worthy.  Castles are
proud things, but 'tis safest to be outside of them.  War is a foul
game, and yet war is not the worst part of aristocratic history.  In
later times, when the baron, educated only for war, with his brains
paralyzed by his stomach, found himself idle at home, he grew fat and
wanton, and a sorry brute.  Grammont, Pepys, and Evelyn, show the
kennels to which the king and court went in quest of pleasure.
Prostitutes taken from the theatres, were made duchesses, their
bastards dukes and earls.  "The young men sat uppermost, the old
serious lords were out of favor." The discourse that the king's
companions had with him was "poor and frothy." No man who valued his
head might do what these pot-companions familiarly did with the king.
In logical sequence of these dignified revels, Pepys can tell the
beggarly shifts to which the king was reduced, who could not find
paper at his council table, and "no handkerchers" in his wardrobe,
"and but three bands to his neck," and the linen-draper and the
stationer were out of pocket, and refusing to trust him, and the
baker will not bring bread any longer.  Meantime, the English Channel
was swept, and London threatened by the Dutch fleet, manned too by
English sailors, who, having been cheated of their pay for years by
the king, enlisted with the enemy.

        The Selwyn correspondence in the reign of George III.,
discloses a rottenness in the aristocracy, which threatened to
decompose the state.  The sycophancy and sale of votes and honor, for
place and title; lewdness, gaming, smuggling, bribery, and cheating;
the sneer at the childish indiscretion of quarrelling with ten
thousand a year; the want of ideas; the splendor of the titles, and
the apathy of the nation, are instructive, and make the reader pause
and explore the firm bounds which confined these vices to a handful
of rich men.  In the reign of the Fourth George, things do not seem
to have mended, and the rotten debauchee let down from a window by an
inclined plane into his coach to take the air, was a scandal to
Europe which the ill fame of his queen and of his family did nothing
to retrieve.

        Under the present reign, the perfect decorum of the Court is
thought to have put a check on the gross vices of the aristocracy yet
gaming, racing, drinking, and mistresses, bring them down, and the
democrat can still gather scandals, if he will.  Dismal anecdotes
abound, verifying the gossip of the last generation of dukes served
by bailiffs, with all their plate in pawn; of great lords living by
the showing of their houses; and of an old man wheeled in his chair
from room to room, whilst his chambers are exhibited to the visitor
for money; of ruined dukes and earls living in exile for debt.  The
historic names of the Buckinghams, Beauforts, Marlboroughs, and
Hertfords, have gained no new lustre, and now and then darker
scandals break out, ominous as the new chapters added under the
Orleans dynasty to the _"Causes Celebres"_ in France.  Even peers,
who are men of worth and public spirit, are over-taken and
embarrassed by their vast expense.  The respectable Duke of
Devonshire, willing to be the Mecaenas and Lucullus of his island, is
reported to have said, that he cannot live at Chatsworth but one
month in the year.  Their many houses eat them up.  They cannot sell
them, because they are entailed.  They will not let them, for pride's
sake, but keep them empty, aired, and the grounds mown and dressed,
at a cost of four or five thousand pounds a year.  The spending is
for a great part in servants, in many houses exceeding a hundred.

        Most of them are only chargeable with idleness, which, because
it squanders such vast power of benefit, has the mischief of crime.
"They might be little Providences on earth," said my friend, "and
they are, for the most part, jockeys and fops." Campbell says,
"acquaintance with the nobility, I could never keep up.  It requires
a life of idleness, dressing, and attendance on their parties." I
suppose, too, that a feeling of self-respect is driving cultivated
men out of this society, as if the noble were slow to receive the
lessons of the times, and had not learned to disguise his pride of
place.  A man of wit, who is also one of the celebrities of wealth
and fashion, confessed to his friend, that he could not enter their
houses without being made to feel that they were great lords, and he
a low plebeian.  With the tribe of _artistes_, including the musical
tribe, the patrician morgue keeps no terms, but excludes them.  When
Julia Grisi and Mario sang at the houses of the Duke of Wellington
and other grandees, a cord was stretched between the singer and the
company.

 
        When every noble was a soldier, they were carefully bred to
great personal prowess.  The education of a soldier is a simpler
affair than that of an earl in the nineteenth century.  And this was
very seriously pursued; they were expert in every species of
equitation, to the most dangerous practices, and this down to the
accession of William of Orange.  But graver men appear to have
trained their sons for civil affairs.  Elizabeth extended her thought
to the future; and Sir Philip Sidney in his letter to his brother,
and Milton and Evelyn, gave plain and hearty counsel.  Already too,
the English noble and squire were preparing for the career of the
country-gentleman, and his peaceable expense.  They went from city to
city, learning receipts to make perfumes, sweet powders, pomanders,
antidotes, gathering seeds, gems, coins, and divers curiosities,
preparing for a private life thereafter, in which they should take
pleasure in these recreations.

        All advantages given to absolve the young patrician from
intellectual labor are of course mistaken.  "In the university,
noblemen are exempted from the public exercises for the degree, &c.,
by which they attain a degree called _honorary_.  At the same time,
the fees they have to pay for matriculation, and on all other
occasions, are much higher." (* 4) Fuller records "the observation of
foreigners, that Englishmen, by making their children gentlemen,
before they are men, cause they are so seldom wise men." This
cockering justifies Dr. Johnson's bitter apology for primogeniture,
"that it makes but one fool in a family."

        (* 4) Huber.  History of English Universities.

        The revolution in society has reached this class.  The great
powers of industrial art have no exclusion of name or blood.  The
tools of our time, namely, steam, ships, printing, money, and popular
education, belong to those who can handle them: and their effect has
been, that advantages once confined to men of family, are now open to
the whole middle class.  The road that grandeur levels for his coach,
toil can travel in his cart.

        This is more manifest every day, but I think it is true
throughout English history.  English history, wisely read, is the
vindication of the brain of that people.  Here, at last, were climate
and condition friendly to the working faculty.  Who now will work and
dare, shall rule.  This is the charter, or the chartism, which fogs,
and seas, and rains proclaimed,--that intellect and personal force
should make the law; that industry and administrative talent should
administer; that work should wear the crown.  I know that not this,
but something else is pretended.  The fiction with which the noble
and the bystander equally please themselves is, that the former is of
unbroken descent from the Norman, and so has never worked for eight
hundred years.  All the families are new, but the name is old, and
they have made a covenant with their memories not to disturb it.  But
the analysis of the peerage and gentry shows the rapid decay and
extinction of old families, the continual recruiting of these from
new blood.  The doors, though ostentatiously guarded, are really
open, and hence the power of the bribe.  All the barriers to rank
only whet the thirst, and enhance the prize.  "Now," said Nelson,
when clearing for battle, "a peerage, or Westminster Abbey!" "I have
no illusion left," said Sydney Smith, "but the Archbishop of
Canterbury." "The lawyers," said Burke, "are only birds of passage in
this House of Commons," and then added, with a new figure, "they have
their best bower anchor in the House of Lords."

        Another stride that has been taken, appears in the perishing of
heraldry.  Whilst the privileges of nobility are passing to the
middle class, the badge is discredited, and the titles of lordship
are getting musty and cumbersome.  I wonder that sensible men have
not been already impatient of them.  They belong, with wigs, powder,
and scarlet coats, to an earlier age, and may be advantageously
consigned, with paint and tattoo, to the dignitaries of Australia and
Polynesia.

        A multitude of English, educated at the universities, bred into
their society with manners, ability, and the gifts of fortune, are
every day confronting the peers on a footing of equality, and
outstripping them, as often, in the race of honor and influence.
That cultivated class is large and ever enlarging.  It is computed
that, with titles and without, there are seventy thousand of these
people coming and going in London, who make up what is called high
society.  They cannot shut their eyes to the fact that an untitled
nobility possess all the power without the inconveniences that belong
to rank, and the rich Englishman goes over the world at the present
day, drawing more than all the advantages which the strongest of his
kings could command.

        Chapter XII _Universities_

        Of British universities, Cambridge has the most illustrious
names on its list.  At the present day, too, it has the advantage of
Oxford, counting in its _alumni_ a greater number of distinguished
scholars.  I regret that I had but a single day wherein to see King's
College Chapel, the beautiful lawns and gardens of the colleges, and
a few of its gownsmen.

        But I availed myself of some repeated invitations to Oxford,
where I had introductions to Dr. Daubeny, Professor of Botany, and to
the Regius Professor of Divinity, as well as to a valued friend, a
Fellow of Oriel, and went thither on the last day of March, 1848.  I
was the guest of my friend in Oriel, was housed close upon that
college, and I lived on college hospitalities.

        My new friends showed me their cloisters, the Bodleian Library,
the Randolph Gallery, Merton Hall, and the rest.  I saw several
faithful, high-minded young men, some of them in the mood of making
sacrifices for peace of mind, -- a topic, of course, on which I had
no counsel to offer.  Their affectionate and gregarious ways reminded
me at once of the habits of _our_ Cambridge men, though I imputed to
these English an advantage in their secure and polished manners.  The
halls are rich with oaken wainscoting and ceiling.  The pictures of
the founders hang from the walls; the tables glitter with plate.  A
youth came forward to the upper table, and pronounced the ancient
form of grace before meals, which, I suppose, has been in use here
for ages, _Benedictus benedicat;_ _benedicitur,_ _benedicatur_.

        It is a curious proof of the English use and wont, or of their
good nature, that these young men are locked up every night at nine
o'clock, and the porter at each hall is required to give the name of
any belated student who is admitted after that hour.  Still more
descriptive is the fact, that out of twelve hundred young men,
comprising the most spirited of the aristocracy, a duel has never
occurred.

        Oxford is old, even in England, and conservative.  Its
foundations date from Alfred, and even from Arthur, if, as is
alleged, the Pheryllt of the Druids had a seminary here.  In the
reign of Edward I., it is pretended, here were thirty thousand
students; and nineteen most noble foundations were then established.
Chaucer found it as firm as if it had always stood; and it is, in
British story, rich with great names, the school of the island, and
the link of England to the learned of Europe.  Hither came Erasmus,
with delight, in 1497.  Albericus Gentilis, in 1580, was relieved and
maintained by the university.  Albert Alaskie, a noble Polonian,
Prince of Sirad, who visited England to admire the wisdom of Queen
Elizabeth, was entertained with stage-plays in the Refectory of
Christchurch, in 1583.  Isaac Casaubon, coming from Henri Quatre of
France, by invitation of James I., was admitted to Christ's College,
in July, 1613.  I saw the Ashmolean Museum, whither Elias Ashmole, in
1682, sent twelve cart-loads of rarities.  Here indeed was the
Olympia of all Antony Wood's and Aubrey's games and heroes, and every
inch of ground has its lustre.  For Wood's _Athenae Oxonienses_, or
calendar of the writers of Oxford for two hundred years, is a lively
record of English manners and merits, and as much a national monument
as Purchas's Pilgrims or Hansard's Register.  On every side, Oxford
is redolent of age and authority.  Its gates shut of themselves
against modern innovation.  It is still governed by the statutes of
Archbishop Laud.  The books in Merton Library are still chained to
the wall.  Here, on August 27, 1660, John Milton's _Pro Populo
Anglicano Defensio_, and _Iconoclastes_ were committed to the flames.
I saw the school-court or quadrangle, where, in 1683, the Convocation
caused the Leviathan of Thomas Hobbes to be publicly burnt.  I do not
know whether this learned body have yet heard of the Declaration of
American Independence, or whether the Ptolemaic astronomy does not
still hold its ground against the novelties of Copernicus.

        As many sons, almost so many benefactors.  It is usual for a
nobleman, or indeed for almost every wealthy student, on quitting
college, to leave behind him some article of plate; and gifts of all
values, from a hall, or a fellowship, or a library, down to a picture
or a spoon, are continually accruing, in the course of a century.  My
friend Doctor J., gave me the following anecdote.  In Sir Thomas
Lawrence's collection at London, were the cartoons of Raphael and
Michel Angelo.  This inestimable prize was offered to Oxford
University for seven thousand pounds.  The offer was accepted, and
the committee charged with the affair had collected three thousand
pounds, when among other friends, they called on Lord Eldon.  Instead
of a hundred pounds, he surprised them by putting down his name for
three thousand pounds.  They told him, they should now very easily
raise the remainder.  "No," he said, "your men have probably already
contributed all they can spare; I can as well give the rest": and he
withdrew his cheque for three thousand, and wrote four thousand
pounds.  I saw the whole collection in April, 1848.

        In the Bodleian Library, Dr. Bandinel showed me the manuscript
Plato, of the date of A. D. 896, brought by Dr. Clarke from Egypt; a
manuscript Virgil, of the same century; the first Bible printed at
Mentz, (I believe in 1450); and a duplicate of the same, which had
been deficient in about twenty leaves at the end.  But, one day,
being in Venice, he bought a room full of books and manuscripts, --
every scrap and fragment, -- for four thousand louis d'ors, and had
the doors locked and sealed by the consul.  On proceeding,
afterwards, to examine his purchase, he found the twenty deficient
pages of his Mentz Bible, in perfect order; brought them to Oxford,
with the rest of his purchase, and placed them in the volume; but has
too much awe for the Providence that appears in bibliography also, to
suffer the reunited parts to be re-bound.  The oldest building here
is two hundred years younger than the frail manuscript brought by Dr.
Clarke from Egypt.  No candle or fire is ever lighted in the
Bodleian.  Its catalogue is the standard catalogue on the desk of
every library in Oxford.  In each several college, they underscore in
red ink on this catalogue the titles of books contained in the
library of that college, -- the theory being that the Bodleian has
all books.  This rich library spent during the last year (1847) for
the purchase of books 1668 pounds.

        The logical English train a scholar as they train an engineer.
Oxford is a Greek factory, as Wilton mills weave carpet, and
Sheffield grinds steel.  They know the use of a tutor, as they know
the use of a horse; and they draw the greatest amount of benefit out
of both.  The reading men are kept by hard walking, hard riding, and
measured eating and drinking, at the top of their condition, and two
days before the examination, do not work, but lounge, ride, or run,
to be fresh on the college doomsday.  Seven years' residence is the
theoretic period for a master's degree.  In point of fact, it has
long been three years' residence, and four years more of standing.
This "three years" is about twenty-one months in all.  (* 1)

        (* 1) Huber, ii. p. 304.

        "The whole expense," says Professor Sewel, "of ordinary college
tuition at Oxford, is about sixteen guineas a year." But this plausible
statement may deceive a reader unacquainted with the fact, that the principal
teaching relied on is private tuition.  And the expenses of private tuition
are reckoned at from 50 to 70 pounds a year, or, $1000 for the whole course
of three years and a half.  At Cambridge $750 a year is economical, and $1500
not extravagant.  (* 2)

        (* 2) Bristed.  Five Years at an English University.

        The number of students and of residents, the dignity of the
authorities, the value of the foundations, the history and the
architecture, the known sympathy of entire Britain in what is done
there, justify a dedication to study in the undergraduate, such as
cannot easily be in America, where his college is half suspected by
the Freshman to be insignificant in the scale beside trade and
politics.  Oxford is a little aristocracy in itself, numerous and
dignified enough to rank with other estates in the realm; and where
fame and secular promotion are to be had for study, and in a
direction which has the unanimous respect of all cultivated nations.

        This aristocracy, of course, repairs its own losses; fills places, as
they fall vacant, from the body of students.  The number of fellowships at
Oxford is 540, averaging 200 pounds a year, with lodging and diet at the
college.  If a young American, loving learning, and hindered by poverty, were
offered a home, a table, the walks, and the library, in one of these
academical palaces, and a thousand dollars a year as long as he chose to
remain a bachelor, he would dance for joy.  Yet these young men thus happily
placed, and paid to read, are impatient of their few checks, and many of them
preparing to resign their fellowships.  They shuddered at the prospect of
dying a Fellow, and they pointed out to me a paralytic old man, who was
assisted into the hall.  As the number of undergraduates at Oxford is only
about 1200 or 1300, and many of these are never competitors, the chance of a
fellowship is very great.  The income of the nineteen colleges is conjectured
at 150,000 pounds a year.

        The effect of this drill is the radical knowledge of Greek and
Latin, and of mathematics, and the solidity and taste of English
criticism.  Whatever luck there may be in this or that award, an Eton
captain can write Latin longs and shorts, can turn the Court-Guide
into hexameters, and it is certain that a Senior Classic can quote
correctly from the _Corpus Poetarum_, and is critically learned in
all the humanities.  Greek erudition exists on the Isis and Cam,
whether the Maud man or the Brazen Nose man be properly ranked or
not; the atmosphere is loaded with Greek learning; the whole river
has reached a certain height, and kills all that growth of weeds,
which this Castalian water kills.  The English nature takes culture
kindly.  So Milton thought.  It refines the Norseman.  Access to the
Greek mind lifts his standard of taste.  He has enough to think of,
and, unless of an impulsive nature, is indisposed from writing or
speaking, by the fulness of his mind, and the new severity of his
taste.  The great silent crowd of thorough-bred Grecians always known
to be around him, the English writer cannot ignore.  They prune his
orations, and point his pen.  Hence, the style and tone of English
journalism.  The men have learned accuracy and comprehension, logic,
and pace, or speed of working.  They have bottom, endurance, wind.
When born with good constitutions, they make those eupeptic
studying-mills, the cast-iron men, the _dura ilia_, whose powers of
performance compare with ours, as the steam-hammer with the
music-box; -- Cokes, Mansfields, Seldens, and Bentleys, and when it
happens that a superior brain puts a rider on this admirable horse,
we obtain those masters of the world who combine the highest energy
in affairs, with a supreme culture.

        It is contended by those who have been bred at Eton, Harrow,
Rugby, and Westminster, that the public sentiment within each of
those schools is high-toned and manly; that, in their playgrounds,
courage is universally admired, meanness despised, manly feelings and
generous conduct are encouraged: that an unwritten code of honor
deals to the spoiled child of rank, and to the child of upstart
wealth an even-handed justice, purges their nonsense out of both, and
does all that can be done to make them gentlemen.

        Again, at the universities, it is urged, that all goes to form
what England values as the flower of its national life, -- a
well-educated gentleman.  The German Huber, in describing to his
countrymen the attributes of an English gentleman, frankly admits,
that, "in Germany, we have nothing of the kind.  A gentleman must
possess a political character, an independent and public position,
or, at least, the right of assuming it.  He must have average
opulence, either of his own, or in his family.  He should also have
bodily activity and strength, unattainable by our sedentary life in
public offices.  The race of English gentlemen presents an appearance
of manly vigor and form, not elsewhere to be found among an equal
number of persons.  No other nation produces the stock.  And, in
England, it has deteriorated.  The university is a decided
presumption in any man's favor.  And so eminent are the members that
a glance at the calendars will show that in all the world one cannot
be in better company than on the books of one of the larger Oxford or
Cambridge colleges." (* 3)

        (* 3) Huber: History of the English Universities.  Newman's
Translation.

        These seminaries are finishing schools for the upper classes,
and not for the poor.  The useful is exploded.  The definition of a
public school is "a school which excludes all that could fit a man
for standing behind a counter."  (* 4)

        (* 4) See Bristed.  Five Years in an English University.  New
York. 1852.

        No doubt, the foundations have been perverted.  Oxford, which
equals in wealth several of the smaller European states, shuts up the
lectureships which were made "public for all men thereunto to have
concourse;" mis-spends the revenues bestowed for such youths "as
should be most meet for towardness, poverty, and painfulness;" there
is gross favoritism; many chairs and many fellowships are made beds
of ease; and 'tis likely that the university will know how to resist
and make inoperative the terrors of parliamentary inquiry; no doubt,
their learning is grown obsolete; -- but Oxford also has its merits,
and I found here also proof of the national fidelity and
thoroughness.  Such knowledge as they prize they possess and impart.
Whether in course or by indirection, whether by a cramming tutor or
by examiners with prizes and foundation scholarships, education
according to the English notion of it is arrived at.  I looked over
the Examination Papers of the year 1848, for the various scholarships
and fellowships, the Lusby, the Hertford, the Dean-Ireland, and the
University, (copies of which were kindly given me by a Greek
professor,) containing the tasks which many competitors had
victoriously performed, and I believed they would prove too severe
tests for the candidates for a Bachelor's degree in Yale or Harvard.
And, in general, here was proof of a more searching study in the
appointed directions, and the knowledge pretended to be conveyed was
conveyed.  Oxford sends out yearly twenty or thirty very able men,
and three or four hundred well-educated men.

        The diet and rough exercise secure a certain amount of old
Norse power.  A fop will fight, and, in exigent circumstances, will
play the manly part.  In seeing these youths, I believed I saw
already an advantage in vigor and color and general habit, over their
contemporaries in the American colleges.  No doubt much of the power
and brilliancy of the reading-men is merely constitutional or
hygienic.  With a hardier habit and resolute gymnastics, with five
miles more walking, or five ounces less eating, or with a saddle and
gallop of twenty miles a day, with skating and rowing-matches, the
American would arrive at as robust exegesis, and cheery and hilarious
tone.  I should readily concede these advantages, which it would be
easy to acquire, if I did not find also that they read better than
we, and write better.

        English wealth falling on their school and university training,
makes a systematic reading of the best authors, and to the end of a
knowledge how the things whereof they treat really stand: whilst
pamphleteer or journalist reading for an argument for a party, or
reading to write, or, at all events, for some by-end imposed on them,
must read meanly and fragmentarily.  Charles I.  said, that he
understood English law as well as a gentleman ought to understand it.

        Then they have access to books; the rich libraries collected at
every one of many thousands of houses, give an advantage not to be
attained by a youth in this country, when one thinks how much more
and better may be learned by a scholar, who, immediately on hearing
of a book, can consult it, than by one who is on the quest, for
years, and reads inferior books, because he cannot find the best.

        Again, the great number of cultivated men keep each other up to
a high standard.  The habit of meeting well-read and knowing men
teaches the art of omission and selection.

        Universities are, of course, hostile to geniuses, which seeing
and using ways of their own, discredit the routine: as churches and
monasteries persecute youthful saints.  Yet we all send our sons to
college, and, though he be a genius, he must take his chance.  The
university must be retrospective.  The gale that gives direction to
the vanes on all its towers blows out of antiquity.  Oxford is a
library, and the professors must be librarians.  And I should as soon
think of quarrelling with the janitor for not magnifying his office
by hostile sallies into the street, like the Governor of Kertch or
Kinburn, as of quarrelling with the professors for not admiring the
young neologists who pluck the beards of Euclid and Aristotle, or for
not attempting themselves to fill their vacant shelves as original
writers.

        It is easy to carp at colleges, and the college, if we will
wait for it, will have its own turn.  Genius exists there also, but
will not answer a call of a committee of the House of Commons.  It is
rare, precarious, eccentric, and darkling.  England is the land of
mixture and surprise, and when you have settled it that the
universities are moribund, out comes a poetic influence from the
heart of Oxford, to mould the opinions of cities, to build their
houses as simply as birds their nests, to give veracity to art, and
charm mankind, as an appeal to moral order always must.  But besides
this restorative genius, the best poetry of England of this age, in
the old forms, comes from two graduates of Cambridge.

 
        Chapter XIII _Religion_

        No people, at the present day, can be explained by their
national religion.  They do not feel responsible for it; it lies far
outside of them.  Their loyalty to truth, and their labor and
expenditure rest on real foundations, and not on a national church.
And English life, it is evident, does not grow out of the Athanasian
creed, or the Articles, or the Eucharist.  It is with religion as
with marriage.  A youth marries in haste; afterwards, when his mind
is opened to the reason of the conduct of life, he is asked, what he
thinks of the institution of marriage, and of the right relations of
the sexes?  `I should have much to say,' he might reply, `if the
question were open, but I have a wife and children, and all question
is closed for me.' In the barbarous days of a nation, some _cultus_
is formed or imported; altars are built, tithes are paid, priests
ordained.  The education and expenditure of the country take that
direction, and when wealth, refinement, great men, and ties to the
world, supervene, its prudent men say, why fight against Fate, or
lift these absurdities which are now mountainous?  Better find some
niche or crevice in this mountain of stone which religious ages have
quarried and carved, wherein to bestow yourself, than attempt any
thing ridiculously and dangerously above your strength, like removing
it.

        In seeing old castles and cathedrals, I sometimes say, as
to-day, in front of Dundee Church tower, which is eight hundred years
old, `this was built by another and a better race than any that now
look on it.' And, plainly, there has been great power of sentiment at
work in this island, of which these buildings are the proofs: as
volcanic basalts show the work of fire which has been extinguished
for ages.  England felt the full heat of the Christianity which
fermented Europe, and drew, like the chemistry of fire, a firm line
between barbarism and culture.  The power of the religious sentiment
put an end to human sacrifices, checked appetite, inspired the
crusades, inspired resistance to tyrants, inspired self-respect, set
bounds to serfdom and slavery, founded liberty, created the religious
architecture, -- York, Newstead, Westminster, Fountains Abbey, Ripon,
Beverley, and Dundee, -- works to which the key is lost, with the
sentiment which created them; inspired the English Bible, the
liturgy, the monkish histories, the chronicle of Richard of Devizes.
The priest translated the Vulgate, and translated the sanctities of
old hagiology into English virtues on English ground.  It was a
certain affirmative or aggressive state of the Caucasian races.  Man
awoke refreshed by the sleep of ages.  The violence of the northern
savages exasperated Christianity into power.  It lived by the love of
the people.  Bishop Wilfrid manumitted two hundred and fifty serfs,
whom he found attached to the soil.  The clergy obtained respite from
labor for the boor on the Sabbath, and on church festivals.  "The
lord who compelled his boor to labor between sunset on Saturday and
sunset on Sunday, forfeited him altogether." The priest came out of
the people, and sympathized with his class.  The church was the
mediator, check, and democratic principle, in Europe.  Latimer,
Wicliffe, Arundel, Cobham, Antony Parsons, Sir Harry Vane, George
Fox, Penn, Bunyan are the democrats, as well as the saints of their
times.  The Catholic church, thrown on this toiling, serious people,
has made in fourteen centuries a massive system, close fitted to the
manners and genius of the country, at once domestical and stately.
In the long time, it has blended with every thing in heaven above and
the earth beneath.  It moves through a zodiac of feasts and fasts,
names every day of the year, every town and market and headland and
monument, and has coupled itself with the almanac, that no court can
be held, no field ploughed, no horse shod, without some leave from
the church.  All maxims of prudence or shop or farm are fixed and
dated by the church.  Hence, its strength in the agricultural
districts.  The distribution of land into parishes enforces a church
sanction to every civil privilege; and the gradation of the clergy,
-- prelates for the rich, and curates for the poor, -- with the fact
that a classical education has been secured to the clergyman, makes
them "the link which unites the sequestered peasantry with the
intellectual advancement of the age."  (* 1)

        (* 1) Wordsworth.
 
        The English church has many certificates to show, of humble
effective service in humanizing the people, in cheering and refining
men, feeding, healing, and educating.  It has the seal of martyrs and
confessors; the noblest books; a sublime architecture; a ritual
marked by the same secular merits, nothing cheap or purchasable.

        From this slow-grown church important reactions proceed; much
for culture, much for giving a direction to the nation's affection
and will to-day.  The carved and pictured chapel, -- its entire
surface animated with image and emblem, -- made the parish-church a
sort of book and Bible to the people's eye.

        Then, when the Saxon instinct had secured a service in the
vernacular tongue, it was the tutor and university of the people.  In
York minster, on the day of the enthronization of the new archbishop,
I heard the service of evening prayer read and chanted in the choir.
It was strange to hear the pretty pastoral of the betrothal of
Rebecca and Isaac, in the morning of the world, read with
circumstantiality in York minster, on the 13th January, 1848, to the
decorous English audience, just fresh from the Times newspaper and
their wine; and listening with all the devotion of national pride.
That was binding old and new to some purpose.  The reverence for the
Scriptures is an element of civilization, for thus has the history of
the world been preserved, and is preserved.  Here in England every
day a chapter of Genesis, and a leader in the Times.

        Another part of the same service on this occasion was not
insignificant.  Handel's coronation anthem, _God save the King_, was
played by Dr. Camidge on the organ, with sublime effect.  The minster
and the music were made for each other.  It was a hint of the part
the church plays as a political engine.  From his infancy, every
Englishman is accustomed to hear daily prayers for the queen, for the
royal family and the Parliament, by name; and this lifelong
consecration of these personages cannot be without influence on his
opinions.

        The universities, also, are parcel of the ecclesiastical
system, and their first design is to form the clergy.  Thus the
clergy for a thousand years have been the scholars of the nation.

        The national temperament deeply enjoys the unbroken order and
tradition of its church; the liturgy, ceremony, architecture the
sober grace, the good company, the connection with the throne, and
with history, which adorn it.  And whilst it endears itself thus to
men of more taste than activity, the stability of the English nation
is passionately enlisted to its support, from its inextricable
connection with the cause of public order, with politics and with the
funds.

        Good churches are not built by bad men; at least, there must be
probity and enthusiasm somewhere in the society.  These minsters were
neither built nor filled by atheists.  No church has had more
learned, industrious or devoted men; plenty of "clerks and bishops,
who, out of their gowns, would turn their backs on no man."  (* 2)
Their architecture still glows with faith in immortality.  Heats and
genial periods arrive in history, or, shall we say, plentitudes of
Divine Presence, by which high tides are caused in the human spirit,
and great virtues and talents appear, as in the eleventh, twelfth,
thirteenth, and again in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries,
when the nation was full of genius and piety.

        (* 2) Fuller.

        But the age of the Wicliffes, Cobhams, Arundels, Beckets; of
the Latimers, Mores, Cranmers; of the Taylors, Leightons, Herberts;
of the Sherlocks, and Butlers, is gone.  Silent revolutions in
opinion have made it impossible that men like these should return, or
find a place in their once sacred stalls.  The spirit that dwelt in
this church has glided away to animate other activities; and they who
come to the old shrines find apes and players rustling the old
garments.

        The religion of England is part of good-breeding.  When you see
on the continent the well-dressed Englishman come into his
ambassador's chapel, and put his face for silent prayer into his
smooth-brushed hat, one cannot help feeling how much national pride
prays with him, and the religion of a gentleman.  So far is he from
attaching any meaning to the words, that he believes himself to have
done almost the generous thing, and that it is very condescending in
him to pray to God.  A great duke said, on the occasion of a victory,
in the House of Lords, that he thought the Almighty God had not been
well used by them, and that it would become their magnanimity, after
so great successes, to take order that a proper acknowledgment be
made.  It is the church of the gentry; but it is not the church of
the poor.  The operatives do not own it, and gentlemen lately
testified in the House of Commons that in their lives they never saw
a poor man in a ragged coat inside a church.

        The torpidity on the side of religion of the vigorous English
understanding, shows how much wit and folly can agree in one brain.
Their religion is a quotation; their church is a doll; and any
examination is interdicted with screams of terror.  In good company,
you expect them to laugh at the fanaticism of the vulgar; but they do
not: they are the vulgar.

        The English, in common perhaps with Christendom in the
nineteenth century, do not respect power, but only performance; value
ideas only for an economic result.  Wellington esteems a saint only
as far as he can be an army chaplain: -- "Mr. Briscoll, by his
admirable conduct and good sense, got the better of Methodism, which
had appeared among the soldiers, and once among the officers." They
value a philosopher as they value an apothecary who brings bark or a
drench; and inspiration is only some blowpipe, or a finer mechanical
aid.

        I suspect that there is in an Englishman's brain a valve that
can be closed at pleasure, as an engineer shuts off steam.  The most
sensible and well-informed men possess the power of thinking just so
far as the bishop in religious matters, and as the chancellor of the
exchequer in politics.  They talk with courage and logic, and show
you magnificent results, but the same men who have brought free trade
or geology to their present standing, look grave and lofty, and shut
down their valve, as soon as the conversation approaches the English
church.  After that, you talk with a box-turtle.

        The action of the university, both in what is taught, and in
the spirit of the place, is directed more on producing an English
gentleman, than a saint or a psychologist.  It ripens a bishop, and
extrudes a philosopher.  I do not know that there is more cabalism in
the Anglican, than in other churches, but the Anglican clergy are
identified with the aristocracy.  They say, here, that, if you talk
with a clergyman, you are sure to find him well-bred, informed, and
candid.  He entertains your thought or your project with sympathy and
praise.  But if a second clergyman come in, the sympathy is at an
end: two together are inaccessible to your thought, and, whenever it
comes to action, the clergyman invariably sides with his church.

        The Anglican church is marked by the grace and good sense of
its forms, by the manly grace of its clergy.  The gospel it preaches,
is, `By taste are ye saved.' It keeps the old structures in repair,
spends a world of money in music and building; and in buying Pugin,
and architectural literature.  It has a general good name for amenity
and mildness.  It is not in ordinary a persecuting church; it is not
inquisitorial, not even inquisitive, is perfectly well-bred, and can
shut its eyes on all proper occasions.  If you let it alone, it will
let you alone.  But its instinct is hostile to all change in
politics, literature, or social arts.  The church has not been the
founder of the London University, of the Mechanics' Institutes, of
the Free School, or whatever aims at diffusion of knowledge.  The
Platonists of Oxford are as bitter against this heresy, as Thomas
Taylor.

        The doctrine of the Old Testament is the religion of England.
The first leaf of the New Testament it does not open.  It believes in
a Providence which does not treat with levity a pound sterling.  They
are neither transcendentalists nor christians.  They put up no
Socratic prayer, much less any saintly prayer for the queen's mind;
ask neither for light nor right, but say bluntly, "grant her in
health and wealth long to live." And one traces this Jewish prayer in
all English private history, from the prayers of King Richard, in
Richard of Devizes' Chronicle, to those in the diaries of Sir Samuel
Romilly, and of Haydon the painter.  "Abroad with my wife," writes
Pepys piously, "the first time that ever I rode in my own coach;
which do make my heart rejoice and praise God, and pray him to bless
it to me, and continue it." The bill for the naturalization of the
Jews (in 1753) was resisted by petitions from all parts of the
kingdom, and by petition from the city of London, reprobating this
bill, as "tending extremely to the dishonor of the Christian
religion, and extremely injurious to the interests and commerce of
the kingdom in general, and of the city of London in particular."

        But they have not been able to congeal humanity by act of
Parliament.  "The heavens journey still and sojourn not," and arts,
wars, discoveries, and opinion, go onward at their own pace.  The new
age has new desires, new enemies, new trades, new charities, and
reads the Scriptures with new eyes.  The chatter of French politics,
the steam-whistle, the hum of the mill, and the noise of embarking
emigrants, had quite put most of the old legends out of mind; so that
when you came to read the liturgy to a modern congregation, it was
almost absurd in its unfitness, and suggested a masquerade of old
costumes.

        No chemist has prospered in the attempt to crystallize a
religion.  It is endogenous, like the skin, and other vital organs.
A new statement every day.  The prophet and apostle knew this, and
the nonconformist confutes the conformists, by quoting the texts they
must allow.  It is the condition of a religion, to require religion
for its expositor.  Prophet and apostle can only be rightly
understood by prophet and apostle.  The statesman knows that the
religious element will not fail, any more than the supply of fibrine
and chyle; but it is in its nature constructive, and will organize
such a church as it wants.  The wise legislator will spend on
temples, schools, libraries, colleges, but will shun the enriching of
priests.  If, in any manner, he can leave the election and paying of
the priest to the people, he will do well.  Like the Quakers, he may
resist the separation of a class of priests, and create opportunity
and expectation in the society, to run to meet natural endowment, in
this kind.  But, when wealth accrues to a chaplaincy, a bishopric, or
rectorship, it requires moneyed men for its stewards, who will give
it another direction than to the mystics of their day.  Of course,
money will do after its kind, and will steadily work to
unspiritualize and unchurch the people to whom it was bequeathed.
The class certain to be excluded from all preferment are the
religious, -- and driven to other churches; -- which is nature's _vis
medicatrix_.

        The curates are ill paid, and the prelates are overpaid.  This abuse
draws into the church the children of the nobility, and other unfit persons,
who have a taste for expense.  Thus a bishop is only a surpliced merchant.
Through his lawn, I can see the bright buttons of the shopman's coat glitter.
A wealth like that of Durham makes almost a premium on felony.  Brougham, in
a speech in the House of Commons on the Irish elective franchise, said, "How
will the reverend bishops of the other house be able to express their due
abhorrence of the crime of perjury, who solemnly declare in the presence of
God, that when they are called upon to accept a living, perhaps of 4000
pounds a year, at that very instant, they are moved by the Holy Ghost to
accept the office and administration thereof, and for no other reason
whatever?" The modes of initiation are more damaging than custom-house oaths.
The Bishop is elected by the Dean and Prebends of the cathedral.  The Queen
sends these gentlemen a _conge d'elire_, or leave to elect; but also sends
them the name of the person whom they are to elect.  They go into the
cathedral, chant and pray, and beseech the Holy Ghost to assist them in their
choice; and, after these invocations, invariably find that the dictates of
the Holy Ghost agree with the recommendations of the Queen.

        But you must pay for conformity.  All goes well as long as you
run with conformists.  But you, who are honest men in other
particulars, know, that there is alive somewhere a man whose honesty
reaches to this point also, that he shall not kneel to false gods,
and, on the day when you meet him, you sink into the class of
counterfeits.  Besides, this succumbing has grave penalties.  If you
take in a lie, you must take in all that belongs to it.  England
accepts this ornamented national church, and it glazes the eyes,
bloats the flesh, gives the voice a stertorous clang, and clouds the
understanding of the receivers.

        The English church, undermined by German criticism, had nothing
left but tradition, and was led logically back to Romanism.  But that
was an element which only hot heads could breathe: in view of the
educated class, generally, it was not a fact to front the sun; and
the alienation of such men from the church became complete.

        Nature, to be sure, had her remedy.  Religious persons are
driven out of the Established Church into sects, which instantly rise
to credit, and hold the Establishment in check.  Nature has sharper
remedies, also.  The English, abhorring change in all things,
abhorring it most in matters of religion, cling to the last rag of
form, and are dreadfully given to cant.  The English, (and I wish it
were confined to them, but 'tis a taint in the Anglo-Saxon blood in
both hemispheres,) the English and the Americans cant beyond all
other nations.  The French relinquish all that industry to them.
What is so odious as the polite bows to God, in our books and
newspapers?  The popular press is flagitious in the exact measure of
its sanctimony, and the religion of the day is a theatrical Sinai,
where the thunders are supplied by the property-man.  The fanaticism
and hypocrisy create satire.  Punch finds an inexhaustible material.
Dickens writes novels on Exeter-Hall humanity.  Thackeray exposes the
heartless high life.  Nature revenges herself more summarily by the
heathenism of the lower classes.  Lord Shaftesbury calls the poor
thieves together, and reads sermons to them, and they call it `gas.'
George Borrow summons the Gypsies to hear his discourse on the
Hebrews in Egypt, and reads to them the Apostles' Creed in Rommany.
"When I had concluded," he says, "I looked around me.  The features
of the assembly were twisted, and the eyes of all turned upon me with
a frightful squint: not an individual present but squinted; the
genteel Pepa, the good-humored Chicharona, the Cosdami, all squinted:
the Gypsy jockey squinted worst of all."

        The church at this moment is much to be pitied.  She has
nothing left but possession.  If a bishop meets an intelligent
gentleman, and reads fatal interrogations in his eyes, he has no
resource but to take wine with him.  False position introduces cant,
perjury, simony, and ever a lower class of mind and character into
the clergy: and, when the hierarchy is afraid of science and
education, afraid of piety, afraid of tradition, and afraid of
theology, there is nothing left but to quit a church which is no
longer one.

        But the religion of England, -- is it the Established Church?
no; is it the sects? no; they are only perpetuations of some private
man's dissent, and are to the Established Church as cabs are to a
coach, cheaper and more convenient, but really the same thing.  Where
dwells the religion?  Tell me first where dwells electricity, or
motion, or thought or gesture.  They do not dwell or stay at all.
Electricity cannot be made fast, mortared up and ended, like London
Monument, or the Tower, so that you shall know where to find it, and
keep it fixed, as the English do with their things, forevermore; it
is passing, glancing, gesticular; it is a traveller, a newness, a
surprise, a secret, which perplexes them, and puts them out.  Yet, if
religion be the doing of all good, and for its sake the suffering of
all evil, _souffrir de tout le monde et ne faire souffrir personne_,
that divine secret has existed in England from the days of Alfred to
those of Romilly, of Clarkson, and of Florence Nightingale, and in
thousands who have no fame.

 
 
        Chapter XIV _Literature_

        A strong common sense, which it is not easy to unseat or
disturb, marks the English mind for a thousand years: a rude strength
newly applied to thought, as of sailors and soldiers who had lately
learned to read.  They have no fancy, and never are surprised into a
covert or witty word, such as pleased the Athenians and Italians, and
was convertible into a fable not long after; but they delight in
strong earthy expression, not mistakable, coarsely true to the human
body, and, though spoken among princes, equally fit and welcome to
the mob.  This homeliness, veracity, and plain style, appear in the
earliest extant works, and in the latest.  It imports into songs and
ballads the smell of the earth, the breath of cattle, and, like a
Dutch painter, seeks a household charm, though by pails and pans.
They ask their constitutional utility in verse.  The kail and
herrings are never out of sight.  The poet nimbly recovers himself
from every sally of the imagination.  The English muse loves the
farmyard, the lane, and market.  She says, with De Stael, "I tramp in
the mire with wooden shoes, whenever they would force me into the
clouds." For, the Englishman has accurate perceptions; takes hold of
things by the right end, and there is no slipperiness in his grasp.
He loves the axe, the spade, the oar, the gun, the steampipe: he has
built the engine he uses.  He is materialist, economical, mercantile.
He must be treated with sincerity and reality, with muffins, and not
the promise of muffins; and prefers his hot chop, with perfect
security and convenience in the eating of it, to the chances of the
amplest and Frenchiest bill of fare, engraved on embossed paper.
When he is intellectual, and a poet or a philosopher, he carries the
same hard truth and the same keen machinery into the mental sphere.
His mind must stand on a fact.  He will not be baffled, or catch at
clouds, but the mind must have a symbol palpable and resisting.  What
he relishes in Dante, is the vice-like tenacity with which he holds a
mental image before the eyes, as if it were a scutcheon painted on a
shield.  Byron "liked something craggy to break his mind upon." A
taste for plain strong speech, what is called a biblical style, marks
the English.  It is in Alfred, and the Saxon Chronicle, and in the
Sagas of the Northmen.  Latimer was homely.  Hobbes was perfect in
the "noble vulgar speech." Donne, Bunyan, Milton, Taylor, Evelyn,
Pepys, Hooker, Cotton, and the translators, wrote it.  How realistic
or materialistic in treatment of his subject, is Swift.  He describes
his fictitious persons, as if for the police.  Defoe has no
insecurity or choice.  Hudibras has the same hard mentality, --
keeping the truth at once to the senses, and to the intellect.

        It is not less seen in poetry.  Chaucer's hard painting of his
Canterbury pilgrims satisfies the senses.  Shakspeare, Spenser, and
Milton, in their loftiest ascents, have this national grip and
exactitude of mind.  This mental materialism makes the value of
English transcendental genius; in these writers, and in Herbert,
Henry More, Donne, and Sir Thomas Browne.  The Saxon materialism and
narrowness, exalted into the sphere of intellect, makes the very
genius of Shakspeare and Milton.  When it reaches the pure element,
it treads the clouds as securely as the adamant.  Even in its
elevations, materialistic, its poetry is common sense inspired; or
iron raised to white heat.

        The marriage of the two qualities is in their speech.  It is a
tacit rule of the language to make the frame or skeleton, of Saxon
words, and, when elevation or ornament is sought, to interweave
Roman; but sparingly; nor is a sentence made of Roman words alone,
without loss of strength.  The children and laborers use the Saxon
unmixed.  The Latin unmixed is abandoned to the colleges and
Parliament.  Mixture is a secret of the English island; and, in their
dialect, the male principle is the Saxon; the female, the Latin; and
they are combined in every discourse.  A good writer, if he has
indulged in a Roman roundness, makes haste to chasten and nerve his
period by English monosyllables.

        When the Gothic nations came into Europe, they found it lighted
with the sun and moon of Hebrew and of Greek genius.  The tablets of
their brain, long kept in the dark, were finely sensible to the
double glory.  To the images from this twin source (of Christianity
and art), the mind became fruitful as by the incubation of the Holy
Ghost.  The English mind flowered in every faculty.  The common-sense
was surprised and inspired.  For two centuries, England was
philosophic, religious, poetic.  The mental furniture seemed of
larger scale; the memory capacious like the storehouse of the rains;
the ardor and endurance of study; the boldness and facility of their
mental construction; their fancy, and imagination, and easy spanning
of vast distances of thought; the enterprise or accosting of new
subjects; and, generally, the easy exertion of power, astonish, like
the legendary feats of Guy of Warwick.  The union of Saxon precision
and oriental soaring, of which Shakspeare is the perfect example, is
shared in less degree by the writers of two centuries.  I find not
only the great masters out of all rivalry and reach, but the whole
writing of the time charged with a masculine force and freedom.

        There is a hygienic simpleness, rough vigor, and closeness to
the matter in hand, even in the second and third class of writers;
and, I think, in the common style of the people, as one finds it in
the citation of wills, letters, and public documents, in proverbs,
and forms of speech.  The more hearty and sturdy expression may
indicate that the savageness of the Norseman was not all gone.  Their
dynamic brains hurled off their words, as the revolving stone hurls
off scraps of grit.  I could cite from the seventeenth century
sentences and phrases of edge not to be matched in the nineteenth.
Their poets by simple force of mind equalized themselves with the
accumulated science of ours.  The country gentlemen had a posset or
drink they called October; and the poets, as if by this hint, knew
how to distil the whole season into their autumnal verses: and, as
nature, to pique the more, sometimes works up deformities into
beauty, in some rare Aspasia, or Cleopatra; and, as the Greek art
wrought many a vase or column, in which too long, or too lithe, or
nodes, or pits and flaws, are made a beauty of; so these were so
quick and vital, that they could charm and enrich by mean and vulgar
objects.

        A man must think that age well taught and thoughtful, by which
masques and poems, like those of Ben Jonson, full of heroic sentiment
in a manly style, were received with favor.  The unique fact in
literary history, the unsurprised reception of Shakspeare; -- the
reception proved by his making his fortune; and the apathy proved by
the absence of all contemporary panegyric, -- seems to demonstrate an
elevation in the mind of the people.  Judge of the splendor of a
nation, by the insignificance of great individuals in it.  The manner
in which they learned Greek and Latin, before our modern facilities
were yet ready, without dictionaries, grammars, or indexes, by
lectures of a professor, followed by their own searchings, --
required a more robust memory, and cooperation of all the faculties;
and their scholars, Camden, Usher, Selden, Mede, Gataker, Hooker,
Taylor, Burton, Bentley, Brian Walton, acquired the solidity and
method of engineers.

        The influence of Plato tinges the British genius.  Their minds
loved analogy; were cognisant of resemblances, and climbers on the
staircase of unity.  'Tis a very old strife between those who elect
to see identity, and those who elect to see discrepances; and it
renews itself in Britain.  The poets, of course, are of one part; the
men of the world, of the other.  But Britain had many disciples of
Plato; -- More, Hooker, Bacon, Sidney, Lord Brooke, Herbert, Browne,
Donne, Spenser, Chapman, Milton, Crashaw, Norris, Cudworth, Berkeley,
Jeremy Taylor.

        Lord Bacon has the English duality.  His centuries of
observations, on useful science, and his experiments, I suppose, were
worth nothing.  One hint of Franklin, or Watt, or Dalton, or Davy, or
any one who had a talent for experiment, was worth all his lifetime
of exquisite trifles.  But he drinks of a diviner stream, and marks
the influx of idealism into England.  Where that goes, is poetry,
health, and progress.  The rules of its genesis or its diffusion are
not known.  That knowledge, if we had it, would supersede all that we
call science of the mind.  It seems an affair of race, or of
meta-chemistry; -- the vital point being, -- how far the sense of
unity, or instinct of seeking resemblances, predominated.  For,
wherever the mind takes a step, it is, to put itself at one with a
larger class, discerned beyond the lesser class with which it has
been conversant.  Hence, all poetry, and all affirmative action
comes.

        Bacon, in the structure of his mind, held of the analogists, of
the idealists, or (as we popularly say, naming from the best example)
Platonists.  Whoever discredits analogy, and requires heaps of facts,
before any theories can be attempted, has no poetic power, and
nothing original or beautiful will be produced by him.  Locke is as
surely the influx of decomposition and of prose, as Bacon and the
Platonists, of growth.  The Platonic is the poetic tendency; the
so-called scientific is the negative and poisonous.  'Tis quite
certain, that Spenser, Burns, Byron, and Wordsworth will be
Platonists; and that the dull men will be Lockists.  Then politics
and commerce will absorb from the educated class men of talents
without genius, precisely because such have no resistance.

        Bacon, capable of ideas, yet devoted to ends, required in his
map of the mind, first of all, universality, or _prima philosophia_,
the receptacle for all such profitable observations and axioms as
fall not within the compass of any of the special parts of
philosophy, but are more common, and of a higher stage.  He held this
element essential: it is never out of mind: he never spares rebukes
for such as neglect it; believing that no perfect discovery can be
made in a flat or level, but you must ascend to a higher science.
"If any man thinketh philosophy and universality to be idle studies,
he doth not consider that all professions are from thence served and
supplied, and this I take to be a great cause that has hindered the
progression of learning, because these fundamental knowledges have
been studied but in passage." He explained himself by giving various
quaint examples of the summary or common laws, of which each science
has its own illustration.  He complains, that "he finds this part of
learning very deficient, the profounder sort of wits drawing a bucket
now and then for their own use, but the spring-head unvisited.  This
was the _dry light_ which did scorch and offend most men's watery
natures." Plato had signified the same sense, when he said, "All the
great arts require a subtle and speculative research into the law of
nature, since loftiness of thought and perfect mastery over every
subject seem to be derived from some such source as this.  This
Pericles had, in addition to a great natural genius.  For, meeting
with Anaxagoras, who was a person of this kind, he attached himself
to him, and nourished himself with sublime speculations on the
absolute intelligence; and imported thence into the oratorical art,
whatever could be useful to it."

 
        A few generalizations always circulate in the world, whose
authors we do not rightly know, which astonish, and appear to be
avenues to vast kingdoms of thought, and these are in the world
_constants_, like the Copernican and Newtonian theories in physics.
In England, these may be traced usually to Shakspeare, Bacon, Milton,
or Hooker, even to Van Helmont and Behmen, and do all have a kind of
filial retrospect to Plato and the Greeks.  Of this kind is Lord
Bacon's sentence, that "nature is commanded by obeying her;" his
doctrine of poetry, which "accommodates the shows of things to the
desires of the mind," or the Zoroastrian definition of poetry,
mystical, yet exact, "apparent pictures of unapparent natures;"
Spenser's creed, that "soul is form, and doth the body make;" the
theory of Berkeley, that we have no certain assurance of the
existence of matter; Doctor Samuel Clarke's argument for theism from
the nature of space and time; Harrington's political rule, that power
must rest on land, -- a rule which requires to be liberally
interpreted; the theory of Swedenborg, so cosmically applied by him,
that the man makes his heaven and hell; Hegel's study of civil
history, as the conflict of ideas and the victory of the deeper
thought; the identity-philosophy of Schelling, couched in the
statement that "all difference is quantitative." So the very
announcement of the theory of gravitation, of Kepler's three harmonic
laws, and even of Dalton's doctrine of definite proportions, finds a
sudden response in the mind, which remains a superior evidence to
empirical demonstrations.  I cite these generalizations, some of
which are more recent, merely to indicate a class.  Not these
particulars, but the mental plane or the atmosphere from which they
emanate, was the home and elements of the writers and readers in what
we loosely call the Elizabethan age, (say, in literary history, the
period from 1575 to 1625,) yet a period almost short enough to
justify Ben Jonson's remark on Lord Bacon; "about his time, and
within his view, were born all the wits that could honor a nation, or
help study."

        Such richness of genius had not existed more than once before.
These heights could not be maintained.  As we find stumps of vast
trees in our exhausted soils, and have received traditions of their
ancient fertility to tillage, so history reckons epochs in which the
intellect of famed races became effete.  So it fared with English
genius.  These heights were followed by a meanness, and a descent of
the mind into lower levels; the loss of wings; no high speculation.
Locke, to whom the meaning of ideas was unknown, became the type of
philosophy, and his "understanding" the measure, in all nations, of
the English intellect.  His countrymen forsook the lofty sides of
Parnassus, on which they had once walked with echoing steps, and
disused the studies once so beloved; the powers of thought fell into
neglect.  The later English want the faculty of Plato and Aristotle,
of grouping men in natural classes by an insight of general laws, so
deep, that the rule is deduced with equal precision from few subjects
or from one, as from multitudes of lives.  Shakspeare is supreme in
that, as in all the great mental energies.  The Germans generalize:
the English cannot interpret the German mind.  German science
comprehends the English.  The absence of the faculty in England is
shown by the timidity which accumulates mountains of facts, as a bad
general wants myriads of men and miles of redoubts, to compensate the
inspirations of courage and conduct.

        The English shrink from a generalization.  "They do not look
abroad into universality, or they draw only a bucket-full at the
fountain of the First Philosophy for their occasion, and do not go to
the spring-head." Bacon, who said this, is almost unique among his
countrymen in that faculty, at least among the prose-writers.
Milton, who was the stair or high table-land to let down the English
genius from the summits of Shakspeare, used this privilege sometimes
in poetry, more rarely in prose.  For a long interval afterwards, it
is not found.  Burke was addicted to generalizing, but his was a
shorter line; as his thoughts have less depth, they have less
compass.  Hume's abstractions are not deep or wise.  He owes his fame
to one keen observation, that no copula had been detected between any
cause and effect, either in physics or in thought; that the term
cause and effect was loosely or gratuitously applied to what we know
only as consecutive, not at all as causal.  Doctor Johnson's written
abstractions have little value: the tone of feeling in them makes
their chief worth.

        Mr. Hallam, a learned and elegant scholar, has written the
history of European literature for three centuries, -- a performance
of great ambition, inasmuch as a judgment was to be attempted on
every book.  But his eye does not reach to the ideal standards: the
verdicts are all dated from London: all new thought must be cast into
the old moulds.  The expansive element which creates literature is
steadily denied.  Plato is resisted, and his school.  Hallam is
uniformly polite, but with deficient sympathy; writes with resolute
generosity, but is unconscious of the deep worth which lies in the
mystics, and which often outvalues as a seed of power and a source of
revolution all the correct writers and shining reputations of their
day.  He passes in silence, or dismisses with a kind of contempt, the
profounder masters: a lover of ideas is not only uncongenial, but
unintelligible.  Hallam inspires respect by his knowledge and
fidelity, by his manifest love of good books, and he lifts himself to
own better than almost any the greatness of Shakspeare, and better
than Johnson he appreciates Milton.  But in Hallam, or in the firmer
intellectual nerve of Mackintosh, one still finds the same type of
English genius.  It is wise and rich, but it lives on its capital.
It is retrospective.  How can it discern and hail the new forms that
are looming up on the horizon, -- new and gigantic thoughts which
cannot dress themselves out of any old wardrobe of the past?

        The essays, the fiction, and the poetry of the day have the
like municipal limits.  Dickens, with preternatural apprehension of
the language of manners, and the varieties of street life, with
pathos and laughter, with patriotic and still enlarging generosity,
writes London tracts.  He is a painter of English details, like
Hogarth; local and temporary in his tints and style, and local in his
aims.  Bulwer, an industrious writer, with occasional ability, is
distinguished for his reverence of intellect as a temporality, and
appeals to the worldly ambition of the student.  His romances tend to
fan these low flames.  Their novelists despair of the heart.
Thackeray finds that God has made no allowance for the poor thing in
his universe; -- more's the pity, he thinks; -- but 'tis not for us
to be wiser: we must renounce ideals, and accept London.

        The brilliant Macaulay, who expresses the tone of the English
governing classes of the day, explicitly teaches, that _good_ means
good to eat, good to wear, material commodity; that the glory of
modern philosophy is its direction on "fruit;" to yield economical
inventions; and that its merit is to avoid ideas, and avoid morals.
He thinks it the distinctive merit of the Baconian philosophy, in its
triumph over the old Platonic, its disentangling the intellect from
theories of the all-Fair and all-Good, and pinning it down to the
making a better sick chair and a better wine-whey for an invalid; --
this not ironically, but in good faith; -- that, "solid advantage,"
as he calls it, meaning always sensual benefit, is the only good.
The eminent benefit of astronomy is the better navigation it creates
to enable the fruit-ships to bring home their lemons and wine to the
London grocer.  It was a curious result, in which the civility and
religion of England for a thousand years, ends, in denying morals,
and reducing the intellect to a sauce-pan.  The critic hides his
skepticism under the English cant of practical.  To convince the
reason, to touch the conscience, is romantic pretension.  The fine
arts fall to the ground.  Beauty, except as luxurious commodity, does
not exist.  It is very certain, I may say in passing, that if Lord
Bacon had been only the sensualist his critic pretends, he would
never have acquired the fame which now entitles him to this
patronage.  It is because he had imagination, the leisures of the
spirit, and basked in an element of contemplation out of all modern
English atmospheric gauges, that he is impressive to the imaginations
of men, and has become a potentate not to be ignored.  Sir David
Brewster sees the high place of Bacon, without finding Newton
indebted to him, and thinks it a mistake.  Bacon occupies it by
specific gravity or levity, not by any feat he did, or by any
tutoring more or less of Newton &c., but an effect of the same cause
which showed itself more pronounced afterwards in Hooke, Boyle, and
Halley.

        Coleridge, a catholic mind, with a hunger for ideas, with eyes
looking before and after to the highest bards and sages, and who
wrote and spoke the only high criticism in his time, -- is one of
those who save England from the reproach of no longer possessing the
capacity to appreciate what rarest wit the island has yielded.  Yet
the misfortune of his life, his vast attempts but most inadequate
performings, failing to accomplish any one masterpiece, seems to mark
the closing of an era.  Even in him, the traditional Englishman was
too strong for the philosopher, and he fell into _accommodations_:
and, as Burke had striven to idealize the English State, so Coleridge
`narrowed his mind' in the attempt to reconcile the gothic rule and
dogma of the Anglican Church, with eternal ideas.  But for Coleridge,
and a lurking taciturn minority, uttering itself in occasional
criticism, oftener in private discourse, one would say, that in
Germany and in America, is the best mind in England rightly
respected.  It is the surest sign of national decay, when the Bramins
can no longer read or understand the Braminical philosophy.

        In the decomposition and asphyxia that followed all this
materialism, Carlyle was driven by his disgust at the pettiness and
the cant, into the preaching of Fate.  In comparison with all this
rottenness, any check, any cleansing, though by fire, seemed
desirable and beautiful.  He saw little difference in the gladiators,
or the "causes" for which they combated; the one comfort was, that
they were all going speedily into the abyss together: And his
imagination, finding no nutriment in any creation, avenged itself by
celebrating the majestic beauty of the laws of decay.  The
necessities of mental structure force all minds into a few
categories, and where impatience of the tricks of men makes Nemesis
amiable, and builds altars to the negative Deity, the inevitable
recoil is to heroism or the gallantry of the private heart, which
decks its immolation with glory, in the unequal combat of will
against fate.

        Wilkinson, the editor of Swedenborg, the annotator of Fourier,
and the champion of Hahnemann, has brought to metaphysics and to
physiology a native vigor, with a catholic perception of relations,
equal to the highest attempts, and a rhetoric like the armory of the
invincible knights of old.  There is in the action of his mind a long
Atlantic roll not known except in deepest waters, and only lacking
what ought to accompany such powers, a manifest centrality.  If his
mind does not rest in immovable biases, perhaps the orbit is larger,
and the return is not yet: but a master should inspire a confidence
that he will adhere to his convictions, and give his present studies
always the same high place.

        It would be easy to add exceptions to the limitary tone of
English thought, and much more easy to adduce examples of excellence
in particular veins: and if, going out of the region of dogma, we
pass into that of general culture, there is no end to the graces and
amenities, wit, sensibility and erudition, of the learned class.  But
the artificial succor which marks all English performance, appears in
letters also: much of their aesthetic production is antiquarian and
manufactured, and literary reputations have been achieved by forcible
men, whose relation to literature was purely accidental, but who were
driven by tastes and modes they found in vogue into their several
careers.  So, at this moment, every ambitious young man studies
geology: so members of Parliament are made, and churchmen.

        The bias of Englishmen to practical skill has reacted on the
national mind.  They are incapable of an inutility, and respect the
five mechanic powers even in their song.  The voice of their modern
muse has a slight hint of the steam-whistle, and the poem is created
as an ornament and finish of their monarchy, and by no means as the
bird of a new morning which forgets the past world in the full
enjoyment of that which is forming.  They are with difficulty ideal;
they are the most conditioned men, as if, having the best conditions,
they could not bring themselves to forfeit them.  Every one of them
is a thousand years old, and lives by his memory: and when you say
this, they accept it as praise.

        Nothing comes to the book-shops but politics, travels,
statistics, tabulation, and engineering, and even what is called
philosophy and letters is mechanical in its structure, as if
inspiration had ceased, as if no vast hope, no religion, no song of
joy, no wisdom, no analogy, existed any more.  The tone of colleges,
and of scholars and of literary society has this mortal air.  I seem
to walk on a marble floor, where nothing will grow.  They exert every
variety of talent on a lower ground, and may be said to live and act
in a sub-mind.  They have lost all commanding views in literature,
philosophy, and science.  A good Englishman shuts himself out of
three fourths of his mind, and confines himself to one fourth.  He
has learning, good sense, power of labor, and logic: but a faith in
the laws of the mind like that of Archimedes; a belief like that of
Euler and Kepler, that experience must follow and not lead the laws
of the mind; a devotion to the theory of politics, like that of
Hooker, and Milton, and Harrington, the modern English mind
repudiates.

        I fear the same fault lies in their science, since they have
known how to make it repulsive, and bereave nature of its charm; --
though perhaps the complaint flies wider, and the vice attaches to
many more than to British physicists.  The eye of the naturalist must
have a scope like nature itself, a susceptibility to all impressions,
alive to the heart as well as to the logic of creation.  But English
science puts humanity to the door.  It wants the connection which is
the test of genius.  The science is false by not being poetic.  It
isolates the reptile or mollusk it assumes to explain; whilst reptile
or mollusk only exists in system, in relation.  The poet only sees it
as an inevitable step in the path of the Creator.  But, in England,
one hermit finds this fact, and another finds that, and lives and
dies ignorant of its value.  There are great exceptions, of John
Hunter, a man of ideas; perhaps of Robert Brown, the botanist; and of
Richard Owen, who has imported into Britain the German homologies,
and enriched science with contributions of his own, adding sometimes
the divination of the old masters to the unbroken power of labor in
the English mind.  But for the most part, the natural science in
England is out of its loyal alliance with morals, and is as void of
imagination and free play of thought, as conveyancing.  It stands in
strong contrast with the genius of the Germans, those semi-Greeks,
who love analogy, and, by means of their height of view, preserve
their enthusiasm, and think for Europe.

        No hope, no sublime augury cheers the student, no secure
striding from experiment onward to a foreseen law, but only a casual
dipping here and there, like diggers in California "prospecting for a
placer" that will pay.  A horizon of brass of the diameter of his
umbrella shuts down around his senses.  Squalid contentment with
conventions, satire at the names of philosophy and religion,
parochial and shop-till politics, and idolatry of usage, betray the
ebb of life and spirit.  As they trample on nationalities to
reproduce London and Londoners in Europe and Asia, so they fear the
hostility of ideas, of poetry, of religion, -- ghosts which they
cannot lay; -- and, having attempted to domesticate and dress the
Blessed Soul itself in English broadcloth and gaiters, they are
tormented with fear that herein lurks a force that will sweep their
system away.  The artists say, "Nature puts them out;" the scholars
have become un-ideal.  They parry earnest speech with banter and
levity; they laugh you down, or they change the subject.  "The fact
is," say they over their wine, "all that about liberty, and so forth,
is gone by; it won't do any longer." The practical and comfortable
oppress them with inexorable claims, and the smallest fraction of
power remains for heroism and poetry.  No poet dares murmur of beauty
out of the precinct of his rhymes.  No priest dares hint at a
Providence which does not respect English utility.  The island is a
roaring volcano of fate, of material values, of tariffs, and laws of
repression, glutted markets and low prices.

        In the absence of the highest aims, of the pure love of
knowledge, and the surrender to nature, there is the suppression of
the imagination, the priapism of the senses and the understanding; we
have the factitious instead of the natural; tasteless expense, arts
of comfort, and the rewarding as an illustrious inventor whosoever
will contrive one impediment more to interpose between the man and
his objects.

        Thus poetry is degraded, and made ornamental.  Pope and his
school wrote poetry fit to put round frosted cake.  What did Walter
Scott write without stint? a rhymed traveller's guide to Scotland.
And the libraries of verses they print have this Birmingham
character.  How many volumes of well-bred metre we must gingle
through, before we can be filled, taught, renewed!  We want the
miraculous; the beauty which we can manufacture at no mill, -- can
give no account of; the beauty of which Chaucer and Chapman had the
secret.  The poetry of course is low and prosaic; only now and then,
as in Wordsworth, conscientious; or in Byron, passional; or in
Tennyson, factitious.  But if I should count the poets who have
contributed to the bible of existing England sentences of guidance
and consolation which are still glowing and effective, -- how few!7
Shall I find my heavenly bread in the reigning poets?  Where is great
design in modern English poetry?  The English have lost sight of the
fact that poetry exists to speak the spiritual law, and that no
wealth of description or of fancy is yet essentially new, and out of
the limits of prose, until this condition is reached.  Therefore the
grave old poets, like the Greek artists, heeded their designs, and
less considered the finish.  It was their office to lead to the
divine sources, out of which all this, and much more, readily
springs; and, if this religion is in the poetry, it raises us to some
purpose, and we can well afford some staidness, or hardness, or want
of popular tune in the verses.

        The exceptional fact of the period is the genius of Wordsworth.
He had no master but nature and solitude.  "He wrote a poem," says
Landor, "without the aid of war." His verse is the voice of sanity in
a worldly and ambitious age.  One regrets that his temperament was
not more liquid and musical.  He has written longer than he was
inspired.  But for the rest, he has no competitor.

        Tennyson is endowed precisely in points where Wordsworth
wanted.  There is no finer ear, nor more command of the keys of
language.  Color, like the dawn, flows over the horizon from his
pencil, in waves so rich that we do not miss the central form.
Through all his refinements, too, he has reached the public, -- a
certificate of good sense and general power, since he who aspires to
be the English poet must be as large as London, not in the same kind
as London, but in his own kind.  But he wants a subject, and climbs
no mount of vision to bring its secrets to the people.  He contents
himself with describing the Englishman as he is, and proposes no
better.  There are all degrees in poetry, and we must be thankful for
every beautiful talent.  But it is only a first success, when the ear
is gained.  The best office of the best poets has been to show how
low and uninspired was their general style, and that only once or
twice they have struck the high chord.

        That expansiveness which is the essence of the poetic element,
they have not.  It was no Oxonian, but Hafiz, who said, "Let us be
crowned with roses, let us drink wine, and break up the tiresome old
roof of heaven into new forms." A stanza of the song of nature the
Oxonian has no ear for, and he does not value the salient and
curative influence of intellectual action, studious of truth, without
a by-end.

        By the law of contraries, I look for an irresistible taste for
Orientalism in Britain.  For a self-conceited modish life, made up of
trifles, clinging to a corporeal civilization, hating ideas, there is
no remedy like the Oriental largeness.  That astonishes and
disconcerts English decorum.  For once there is thunder it never
heard, light it never saw, and power which trifles with time and
space.  I am not surprised, then, to find an Englishman like Warren
Hastings, who had been struck with the grand style of thinking in the
Indian writings, deprecating the prejudices of his countrymen, while
offering them a translation of the Bhagvat.  "Might I, an unlettered
man, venture to prescribe bounds to the latitude of criticism, I
should exclude, in estimating the merit of such a production, all
rules drawn from the ancient or modern literature of Europe, all
references to such sentiments or manners as are become the standards
of propriety for opinion and action in our own modes, and, equally,
all appeals to our revealed tenets of religion and moral duty."  (*
1)  He goes on to bespeak indulgence to "ornaments of fancy unsuited
to our taste, and passages elevated to a tract of sublimity into
which our habits of judgment will find it difficult to pursue them."

        (* 1) Preface to Wilkins's Translation of the Bhagvat Geeta.

        Meantime, I know that a retrieving power lies in the English
race, which seems to make any recoil possible; in other words, there
is at all times a minority of profound minds existing in the nation,
capable of appreciating every soaring of intellect and every hint of
tendency.  While the constructive talent seems dwarfed and
superficial, the criticism is often in the noblest tone, and suggests
the presence of the invisible gods.  I can well believe what I have
often heard, that there are two nations in England; but it is not the
Poor and the Rich; nor is it the Normans and Saxons; nor the Celt and
the Goth.  These are each always becoming the other; for Robert Owen
does not exaggerate the power of circumstance.  But the two
complexions, or two styles of mind, -- the perceptive class, and the
practical finality class, -- are ever in counterpoise, interacting
mutually; one, in hopeless minorities; the other, in huge masses; one
studious, contemplative, experimenting; the other, the ungrateful
pupil, scornful of the source, whilst availing itself of the
knowledge for gain; these two nations, of genius and of animal force,
though the first consist of only a dozen souls, and the second of
twenty millions, forever by their discord and their accord yield the
power of the English State.

 
        Chapter XV _The "Times"_

        The power of the newspaper is familiar in America, and in
accordance with our political systemgonism with the feudal
institutions, and it is all the more beneficent succor against the
secretive tendencies of a monarchy.  The celebrated Lord Somers "knew
of no good law proposed and passed in his time, to which the public
papers had not directed his attention." There is no corner and no
night.  A relentless inquisition drags every secret to the day, turns
the glare of this solar microscope on every malfaisance, so as to
make the public a more terrible spy than any foreigner; and no
weakness can be taken advantage of by an enemy, since the whole
people are already forewarned.  Thus England rids herself of those
incrustations which have been the ruin of old states.  Of course,
this inspection is feared.  No antique privilege, no comfortable
monopoly, but sees surely that its days are counted; the people are
familiarized with the reason of reform, and, one by one, take away
every argument of the obstructives.  "So your grace likes the comfort
of reading the newspapers," said Lord Mansfield to the Duke of
Northumberland; "mark my words; you and I shall not live to see it,
but this young gentleman (Lord Eldon) may, or it may be a little
later; but a little sooner or later, these newspapers will most
assuredly write the dukes of Northumberland out of their titles and
possessions, and the country out of its king." The tendency in
England towards social and political institutions like those of
America, is inevitable, and the ability of its journals is the
driving force.

        England is full of manly, clever, well-bred men who possess the
talent of writing off-hand pungent paragraphs, expressing with
clearness and courage their opinion on any person or performance.
Valuable or not, it is a skill that is rarely found, out of the
English journals.  The English do this, as they write poetry, as they
ride and box, by being educated to it.  Hundreds of clever Praeds,
and Freres, and Froudes, and Hoods, and Hooks, and Maginns, and
Mills, and Macaulays, make poems, or short essays for a journal, as
they make speeches in Parliament and on the hustings, or, as they
shoot and ride.  It is a quite accidental and arbitrary direction of
their general ability.  Rude health and spirits, an Oxford education,
and the habits of society are implied, but not a ray of genius.  It
comes of the crowded state of the professions, the violent interest
which all men take in politics, the facility of experimenting in the
journals, and high pay.

        The most conspicuous result of this talent is the "Times"
newspaper.  No power in England is more felt, more feared, or more
obeyed.  What you read in the morning in that journal, you shall hear
in the evening in all society.  It has ears every where, and its
information is earliest, completest, and surest.  It has risen, year
by year, and victory by victory, to its present authority.  I asked
one of its old contributors, whether it had once been abler than it
is now?  "Never," he said; "these are its palmiest days." It has
shown those qualities which are dear to Englishmen, unflinching
adherence to its objects, prodigal intellectual ability, and a
towering assurance, backed by the perfect organization in its
printing-house, and its world-wide net-work of correspondence and
reports.  It has its own history and famous trophies.  In 1820, it
adopted the cause of Queen Caroline, and carried it against the king.
It adopted a poor-law system, and almost alone lifted it through.
When Lord Brougham was in power, it decided against him, and pulled
him down.  It declared war against Ireland, and conquered it.  It
adopted the League against the Corn Laws, and, when Cobden had begun
to despair, it announced his triumph.  It denounced and discredited
the French Republic of 1848, and checked every sympathy with it in
England, until it had enrolled 200,000 special constables to watch
the Chartists, and make them ridiculous on the 10th April.  It first
denounced and then adopted the new French Empire, and urged the
French Alliance and its results.  It has entered into each municipal,
literary, and social question, almost with a controlling voice.  It
has done bold and seasonable service in exposing frauds which
threatened the commercial community.  Meantime, it attacks its rivals
by perfecting its printing machinery, and will drive them out of
circulation: for the only limit to the circulation of the "Times is
the impossibility of printing copies fast enough; since a daily paper
can only be new and seasonable for a few hours.  It will kill all but
that paper which is diametrically in opposition; since many papers,
first and last, have lived by their attacks on the leading journal.

        The late Mr. Walter was printer of the "Times," and had
gradually arranged the whole _materiel_ of it in perfect system.  It
is told, that when he demanded a small share in the proprietary, and
was refused, he said, "As you please, gentlemen; and you may take
away the `Times' from this office, when you will; I shall publish the
`New Times,' next Monday morning." The proprietors, who had already
complained that his charges for printing were excessive, found that
they were in his power, and gave him whatever he wished.

        I went one day with a good friend to the "Times" office, which
was entered through a pretty garden-yard, in Printing-House Square.
We walked with some circumspection, as if we were entering a
powder-mill; but the door was opened by a mild old woman, and, by
dint of some transmission of cards, we were at last conducted into
the parlor of Mr. Morris, a very gentle person, with no hostile
appearances.  The statistics are now quite out of date, but I
remember he told us that the daily printing was then 35,000 copies;
that on the 1st March, 1848, the greatest number ever printed, --
54,000 were issued; that, since February, the daily circulation had
increased by 8000 copies.  The old press they were then using printed
five or six thousand sheets per hour; the new machine, for which they
were then building an engine, would print twelve thousand per hour.
Our entertainer confided us to a courteous assistant to show us the
establishment, in which, I think, they employed a hundred and twenty
men.  I remember, I saw the reporters' room, in which they redact
their hasty stenographs, but the editor's room, and who is in it, I
did not see, though I shared the curiosity of mankind respecting it.

        The staff of the "Times" has always been made up of able men.
Old Walter, Sterling, Bacon, Barnes, Alsiger, Horace Twiss, Jones
Loyd, John Oxenford, Mr. Mosely, Mr. Bailey, have contributed to its
renown in their special departments.  But it has never wanted the
first pens for occasional assistance.  Its private information is
inexplicable, and recalls the stories of Fouche's police, whose
omniscience made it believed that the Empress Josephine must be in
his pay.  It has mercantile and political correspondents in every
foreign city; and its expresses outrun the despatches of the
government.  One hears anecdotes of the rise of its servants, as of
the functionaries of the India House.  I was told of the dexterity of
one of its reporters, who, finding himself, on one occasion, where
the magistrates had strictly forbidden reporters, put his hands into
his coat-pocket, and with pencil in one hand, and tablet in the
other, did his work.

        The influence of this journal is a recognized power in Europe,
and, of course, none is more conscious of it than its conductors.
The tone of its articles has often been the occasion of comment from
the official organs of the continental courts, and sometimes the
ground of diplomatic complaint.  What would the "Times" say? is a
terror in Paris, in Berlin, in Vienna, in Copenhagen, and in Nepaul.
Its consummate discretion and success exhibit the English skill of
combination.  The daily paper is the work of many hands, chiefly, it
is said, of young men recently from the University, and perhaps
reading law in chambers in London.  Hence the academic elegance, and
classic allusion, which adorn its columns.  Hence, too, the heat and
gallantry of its onset.  But the steadiness of the aim suggests the
belief that this fire is directed and fed by older engineers; as if
persons of exact information, and with settled views of policy,
supplied the writers with the basis of fact, and the object to be
attained, and availed themselves of their younger energy and
eloquence to plead the cause.  Both the council and the executive
departments gain by this division.  Of two men of equal ability, the
one who does not write, but keeps his eye on the course of public
affairs, will have the higher judicial wisdom.  But the parts are
kept in concert; all the articles appear to proceed from a single
will.  The "Times" never disapproves of what itself has said, or
cripples itself by apology for the absence of the editor, or the
indiscretion of him who held the pen.  It speaks out bluff and bold,
and sticks to what it says.  It draws from any number of learned and
skilful contributors; but a more learned and skilful person
supervises, corrects, and coordinates.  Of this closet, the secret
does not transpire.  No writer is suffered to claim the authorship of
any paper; every thing good, from whatever quarter, comes out
editorially; and thus, by making the paper every thing, and those who
write it nothing, the character and the awe of the journal gain.

        The English like it for its complete information.  A statement
of fact in the "Times" is as reliable as a citation from Hansard.
Then, they like its independence; they do not know, when they take it
up, what their paper is going to say: but, above all, for the
nationality and confidence of its tone.  It thinks for them all; it
is their understanding and day's ideal daguerreotyped.  When I see
them reading its columns, they seem to me becoming every moment more
British.  It has the national courage, not rash and petulant, but
considerate and determined.  No dignity or wealth is a shield from
its assault.  It attacks a duke as readily as a policeman, and with
the most provoking airs of condescension.  It makes rude work with
the Board of Admiralty.  The Bench of Bishops is still less safe.
One bishop fares badly for his rapacity, and another for his bigotry,
and a third for his courtliness.  It addresses occasionally a hint to
Majesty itself, and sometimes a hint which is taken.  There is an air
of freedom even in their advertising columns, which speaks well for
England to a foreigner.  On the days when I arrived in London in
1847, I read among the daily announcements, one offering a reward of
fifty pounds to any person who would put a nobleman, described by
name and title, late a member of Parliament, into any county jail in
England, he having been convicted of obtaining money under false
pretences.

        Was never such arrogancy as the tone of this paper.  Every slip
of an Oxonian or Cantabrigian who writes his first leader, assumes
that we subdued the earth before we sat down to write this particular
"Times." One would think, the world was on its knees to the "Times"
Office, for its daily breakfast.  But this arrogance is calculated.
Who would care for it, if it "surmised," or "dared to confess," or
"ventured to predict," &c. No; _it is so_, and so it shall be.

        The morality and patriotism of the "Times" claims only to be
representative, and by no means ideal.  It gives the argument, not of
the majority, but of the commanding class.  Its editors know better
than to defend Russia, or Austria, or English vested rights, on
abstract grounds.  But they give a voice to the class who, at the
moment, take the lead; and they have an instinct for finding where
the power now lies, which is eternally shifting its banks.
Sympathizing with, and speaking for the class that rules the hour,
yet, being apprised of every ground-swell, every Chartist resolution,
every Church squabble, every strike in the mills, they detect the
first tremblings of change.  They watch the hard and bitter struggles
of the authors of each liberal movement, year by year, -- watching
them only to taunt and obstruct them, -- until, at last, when they
see that these have established their fact, that power is on the
point of passing to them, -- they strike in, with the voice of a
monarch, astonish those whom they succor, as much as those whom they
desert, and make victory sure.  Of course, the aspirants see that the
"Times" is one of the goods of fortune, not to be won but by winning
their cause.

        "Punch" is equally an expression of English good sense, as the
"London Times." It is the comic version of the same sense.  Many of
its caricatures are equal to the best pamphlets, and will convey to
the eye in an instant the popular view which was taken of each turn
of public affairs.  Its sketches are usually made by masterly hands,
and sometimes with genius; the delight of every class, because
uniformly guided by that taste which is tyrannical in England.  It is
a new trait of the nineteenth century, that the wit and humor of
England, as in Punch, so in the humorists, Jerrold, Dickens,
Thackeray, Hood, have taken the direction of humanity and freedom.

        The "Times," like every important institution, shows the way to
a better.  It is a living index of the colossal British power.  Its
existence honors the people who dare to print all they know, dare to
know all the facts, and do not wish to be flattered by hiding the
extent of the public disaster.  There is always safety in valor.  I
wish I could add, that this journal aspired to deserve the power it
wields, by guidance of the public sentiment to the right.  It is
usually pretended, in Parliament and elsewhere, that the English
press has a high tone, -- which it has not.  It has an imperial tone,
as of a powerful and independent nation.  But as with other empires,
its tone is prone to be official, and even officinal.  The "Times"
shares all the limitations of the governing classes, and wishes never
to be in a minority.  If only it dared to cleave to the right, to
show the right to be the only expedient, and feed its batteries from
the central heart of humanity, it might not have so many men of rank
among its contributors, but genius would be its cordial and
invincible ally; it might now and then bear the brunt of formidable
combinations, but no journal is ruined by wise courage.  It would be
the natural leader of British reform; its proud function, that of
being the voice of Europe, the defender of the exile and patriot
against despots, would be more effectually discharged; it would have
the authority which is claimed for that dream of good men not yet
come to pass, an International Congress; and the least of its
victories would be to give to England a new millennium of beneficent
power.

 
 
 
        Chapter XVI _Stonehenge_

        It had been agreed between my friend Mr. C. and me, that before
I left England, we should make an excursion together to Stonehenge,
which neither of us had seen; and the project pleased my fancy with
the double attraction of the monument and the companion.  It seemed a
bringing together of extreme points, to visit the oldest religious
monument in Britain, in company with her latest thinker, and one
whose influence may be traced in every contemporary book.  I was glad
to sum up a little my experiences, and to exchange a few reasonable
words on the aspects of England, with a man on whose genius I set a
very high value, and who had as much penetration, and as severe a
theory of duty, as any person in it.  On Friday, 7th July, we took
the South Western Railway through Hampshire to Salisbury, where we
found a carriage to convey us to Amesbury.  The fine weather and my
friend's local knowledge of Hampshire, in which he is wont to spend a
part of every summer, made the way short.  There was much to say,
too, of the travelling Americans, and their usual objects in London.
I thought it natural, that they should give some time to works of art
collected here, which they cannot find at home, and a little to
scientific clubs and museums, which, at this moment, make London very
attractive.  But my philosopher was not contented.  Art and `high
art' is a favorite target for his wit.  "Yes, _Kunst_ is a great
delusion, and Goethe and Schiller wasted a great deal of good time on
it:" -- and he thinks he discovers that old Goethe found this out,
and, in his later writings, changed his tone.  As soon as men begin
to talk of art, architecture, and antiquities, nothing good comes of
it.  He wishes to go through the British Museum in silence, and
thinks a sincere man will see something, and say nothing.  In these
days, he thought, it would become an architect to consult only the
grim necessity, and say, `I can build you a coffin for such dead
persons as you are, and for such dead purposes as you have, but you
shall have no ornament.' For the science, he had, if possible, even
less tolerance, and compared the savans of Somerset House to the boy
who asked Confucius "how many stars in the sky?" Confucius replied,
"he minded things near him:" then said the boy, "how many hairs are
there in your eyebrows?" Confucius said, "he didn't know and didn't
care."

        Still speaking of the Americans, C. complained that they
dislike the coldness and exclusiveness of the English, and run away
to France, and go with their countrymen, and are amused, instead of
manfully staying in London, and confronting Englishmen, and acquiring
their culture, who really have much to teach them.

        I told C. that I was easily dazzled, and was accustomed to
concede readily all that an Englishman would ask; I saw everywhere in
the country proofs of sense and spirit, and success of every sort: I
like the people: they are as good as they are handsome; they have
everything, and can do everything: but meantime, I surely know, that,
as soon as I return to Massachusetts, I shall lapse at once into the
feeling, which the geography of America inevitably inspires, that we
play the game with immense advantage; that there and not here is the
seat and centre of the British race; and that no skill or activity
can long compete with the prodigious natural advantages of that
country, in the hands of the same race; and that England, an old and
exhausted island, must one day be contented, like other parents, to
be strong only in her children.  But this was a proposition which no
Englishman of whatever condition can easily entertain.

        We left the train at Salisbury, and took a carriage to
Amesbury, passing by Old Sarum, a bare, treeless hill, once
containing the town which sent two members to Parliament, -- now, not
a hut; -- and, arriving at Amesbury, stopped at the George Inn.
After dinner, we walked to Salisbury Plain.  On the broad downs,
under the gray sky, not a house was visible, nothing but Stonehenge,
which looked like a group of brown dwarfs in the wide expanse, --
Stonehenge and the barrows, -- which rose like green bosses about the
plain, and a few hayricks.  On the top of a mountain, the old temple
would not be more impressive.  Far and wide a few shepherds with
their flocks sprinkled the plain, and a bagman drove along the road.
It looked as if the wide margin given in this crowded isle to this
primeval temple were accorded by the veneration of the British race
to the old egg out of which all their ecclesiastical structures and
history had proceeded.  Stonehenge is a circular colonnade with a
diameter of a hundred feet, and enclosing a second and a third
colonnade within.  We walked round the stones, and clambered over
them, to wont ourselves with their strange aspect and groupings, and
found a nook sheltered from the wind among them, where C. lighted his
cigar.  It was pleasant to see, that, just this simplest of all
simple structures, -- two upright stones and a lintel laid across, --
had long outstood all later churches, and all history, and were like
what is most permanent on the face of the planet: these, and the
barrows, -- mere mounds, (of which there are a hundred and sixty
within a circle of three miles about Stonehenge,) like the same mound
on the plain of Troy, which still makes good to the passing mariner
on Hellespont, the vaunt of Homer and the fame of Achilles.  Within
the enclosure, grow buttercups, nettles, and, all around, wild thyme,
daisy, meadowsweet, goldenrod, thistle, and the carpeting grass.
Over us, larks were soaring and singing, -- as my friend said, "the
larks which were hatched last year, and the wind which was hatched
many thousand years ago." We counted and measured by paces the
biggest stones, and soon knew as much as any man can suddenly know of
the inscrutable temple.  There are ninety-four stones, and there were
once probably one hundred and sixty.  The temple is circular, and
uncovered, and the situation fixed astronomically, -- the grand
entrances here, and at Abury, being placed exactly northeast, "as all
the gates of the old cavern temples are." How came the stones here?
for these _sarsens_ or Druidical sandstones, are not found in this
neighborhood.  The _sacrificial stone_, as it is called, is the only
one in all these blocks, that can resist the action of fire, and as I
read in the books, must have been brought one hundred and fifty
miles.

        On almost every stone we found the marks of the mineralogist's
hammer and chisel.  The nineteen smaller stones of the inner circle
are of granite.  I, who had just come from Professor Sedgwick's
Cambridge Museum of megatheria and mastodons, was ready to maintain
that some cleverer elephants or mylodonta had borne off and laid
these rocks one on another.  Only the good beasts must have known how
to cut a well-wrought tenon and mortise, and to smooth the surface of
some of the stones.  The chief mystery is, that any mystery should
have been allowed to settle on so remarkable a monument, in a country
on which all the muses have kept their eyes now for eighteen hundred
years.  We are not yet too late to learn much more than is known of
this structure.  Some diligent Fellowes or Layard will arrive, stone
by stone, at the whole history, by that exhaustive British sense and
perseverance, so whimsical in its choice of objects, which leaves its
own Stonehenge or Choir Gaur to the rabbits, whilst it opens
pyramids, and uncovers Nineveh.  Stonehenge, in virtue of the
simplicity of its plan, and its good preservation, is as if new and
recent; and, a thousand years hence, men will thank this age for the
accurate history it will yet eliminate.  We walked in and out, and
took again and again a fresh look at the uncanny stones.  The old
sphinx put our petty differences of nationality out of sight.  To
these conscious stones we two pilgrims were alike known and near.  We
could equally well revere their old British meaning.  My philosopher
was subdued and gentle.  In this quiet house of destiny, he happened
to say, "I plant cypresses wherever I go, and if I am in search of
pain, I cannot go wrong." The spot, the gray blocks, and their rude
order, which refuses to be disposed of, suggested to him the flight
of ages, and the succession of religions.  The old times of England
impress C. much: he reads little, he says, in these last years, but
"_Acta Sanctorum_," the fifty-three volumes of which are in the
"London Library." He finds all English history therein.  He can see,
as he reads, the old saint of Iona sitting there, and writing, a man
to men.  The _Acta Sanctorum_ show plainly that the men of those
times believed in God, and in the immortality of the soul, as their
abbeys and cathedrals testify: now, even the puritanism is all gone.
London is pagan.  He fancied that greater men had lived in England,
than any of her writers; and, in fact, about the time when those
writers appeared, the last of these were already gone.

        We left the mound in the twilight, with the design to return
the next morning, and coming back two miles to our inn, we were met
by little showers, and late as it was, men and women were out
attempting to protect their spread wind-rows.  The grass grows rank
and dark in the showery England.  At the inn, there was only milk for
one cup of tea.  When we called for more, the girl brought us three
drops.  My friend was annoyed who stood for the credit of an English
inn, and still more, the next morning, by the dog-cart, sole
procurable vehicle, in which we were to be sent to Wilton.  I engaged
the local antiquary, Mr. Brown, to go with us to Stonehenge, on our
way, and show us what he knew of the "astronomical" and "sacrificial"
stones.  I stood on the last, and he pointed to the upright, or
rather, inclined stone, called the "astronomical," and bade me notice
that its top ranged with the sky-line.  "Yes." Very well.  Now, at
the summer solstice, the sun rises exactly over the top of that
stone, and, at the Druidical temple at Abury, there is also an
astronomical stone, in the same relative positions.

        In the silence of tradition, this one relation to science
becomes an important clue; but we were content to leave the problem,
with the rocks.  Was this the "Giants' Dance" which Merlin brought
from Killaraus, in Ireland, to be Uther Pendragon's monument to the
British nobles whom Hengist slaughtered here, as Geoffrey of Monmouth
relates? or was it a Roman work, as Inigo Jones explained to King
James; or identical in design and style with the East Indian temples
of the sun; as Davies in the Celtic Researches maintains?  Of all the
writers, Stukeley is the best.  The heroic antiquary, charmed with
the geometric perfections of his ruin, connects it with the oldest
monuments and religion of the world, and with the courage of his
tribe, does not stick to say, "the Deity who made the world by the
scheme of Stonehenge." He finds that the _cursus_ (* 1) on Salisbury
Plain stretches across the downs, like a line of latitude upon the
globe, and the meridian line of Stonehenge passes exactly through the
middle of this _cursus_.  But here is the high point of the theory:
the Druids had the magnet; laid their courses by it; their cardinal
points in Stonehenge, Ambresbury, and elsewhere, which vary a little
from true east and west, followed the variations of the compass.  The
Druids were Ph;oenicians.  The name of the magnet is _lapis
Heracleus_, and Hercules was the god of the Phoenicians.  Hercules,
in the legend, drew his bow at the sun, and the sun-god gave him a
golden cup, with which he sailed over the ocean.  What was this, but
a compass-box?  This cup or little boat, in which the magnet was made
to float on water, and so show the north, was probably its first
form, before it was suspended on a pin.  But science was an
_arcanum_, and, as Britain was a Ph;oenician secret, so they kept
their compass a secret, and it was lost with the Tyrian commerce.
The golden fleece, again, of Jason, was the compass, -- a bit of
loadstone, easily supposed to be the only one in the world, and
therefore naturally awakening the cupidity and ambition of the young
heroes of a maritime nation to join in an expedition to obtain
possession of this wise stone.  Hence the fable that the ship Argo
was loquacious and oracular.  There is also some curious coincidence
in the names.  Apollodorus makes _Magnes_ the son of _Aeolus_, who
married _Nais_.  On hints like these, Stukeley builds again the grand
colonnade into historic harmony, and computing backward by the known
variations of the compass, bravely assigns the year 406 before
Christ, for the date of the temple.

        (* 1) Connected with Stonehenge are an avenue and a _cursus_.
The avenue is a narrow road of raised earth, extending 594 yards in a
straight line from the grand entrance, then dividing into two
branches, which lead, severally, to a row of barrows; and to the
_cursus_, -- an artificially formed flat tract of ground.  This is
half a mile northeast from Stonehenge, bounded by banks and ditches,
3036 yards long, by 110 broad.

        For the difficulty of handling and carrying stones of this
size, the like is done in all cities, every day, with no other aid
than horse power.  I chanced to see a year ago men at work on the
substructure of a house in Bowdoin Square, in Boston, swinging a
block of granite of the size of the largest of the Stonehenge columns
with an ordinary derrick.  The men were common masons, with paddies
to help, nor did they think they were doing anything remarkable.  I
suppose, there were as good men a thousand years ago.  And we wonder
how Stonehenge was built and forgotten.  After spending half an hour
on the spot, we set forth in our dog-cart over the downs for Wilton,
C. not suppressing some threats and evil omens on the proprietors,
for keeping these broad plains a wretched sheep-walk, when so many
thousands of English men were hungry and wanted labor.  But I heard
afterwards that it is not an economy to cultivate this land, which
only yields one crop on being broken up and is then spoiled.

 
        We came to Wilton and to Wilton Hall, -- the renowned seat of
the Earls of Pembroke, a house known to Shakspeare and Massinger, the
frequent home of Sir Philip Sidney where he wrote the Arcadia; where
he conversed with Lord Brooke, a man of deep thought, and a poet, who
caused to be engraved on his tombstone, "Here lies Fulke Greville
Lord Brooke, the friend of Sir Philip Sidney." It is now the property
of the Earl of Pembroke, and the residence of his brother, Sidney
Herbert, Esq., and is esteemed a noble specimen of the English
manor-hall.  My friend had a letter from Mr. Herbert to his
housekeeper, and the house was shown.  The state drawing-room is a
double cube, 30 feet high, by 30 feet wide, by 60 feet long: the
adjoining room is a single cube, of 30 feet every way.  Although
these apartments and the long library were full of good family
portraits, Vandykes and other; and though there were some good
pictures, and a quadrangle cloister full of antique and modern
statuary, -- to which C., catalogue in hand, did all too much
justice, -- yet the eye was still drawn to the windows, to a
magnificent lawn, on which grew the finest cedars in England.  I had
not seen more charming grounds.  We went out, and walked over the
estate.  We crossed a bridge built by Inigo Jones over a stream, of
which the gardener did not know the name, (_Qu_. Alph?) watched the
deer; climbed to the lonely sculptured summer house, on a hill backed
by a wood; came down into the Italian garden, and into a French
pavilion, garnished with French busts; and so again, to the house,
where we found a table laid for us with bread, meats, peaches,
grapes, and wine.

        On leaving Wilton House, we took the coach for Salisbury.  The
Cathedral, which was finished 600 years ago, has even a spruce and
modern air, and its spire is the highest in England.  I know not why,
but I had been more struck with one of no fame at Coventry, which
rises 300 feet from the ground, with the lightness of a
mullein-plant, and not at all implicated with the church.  Salisbury
is now esteemed the culmination of the Gothic art in England, as the
buttresses are fully unmasked, and honestly detailed from the sides
of the pile.  The interior of the Cathedral is obstructed by the
organ in the middle, acting like a screen.  I know not why in real
architecture the hunger of the eye for length of line is so rarely
gratified.  The rule of art is that a colonnade is more beautiful the
longer it is, and that _ad infinitum_.  And the nave of a church is
seldom so long that it need be divided by a screen.

        We loitered in the church, outside the choir, whilst service
was said.  Whilst we listened to the organ, my friend remarked, the
music is good, and yet not quite religious, but somewhat as if a monk
were panting to some fine Queen of Heaven.  C. was unwilling, and we
did not ask to have the choir shown us, but returned to our inn,
after seeing another old church of the place.  We passed in the train
Clarendon Park, but could see little but the edge of a wood, though
C. had wished to pay closer attention to the birthplace of the
Decrees of Clarendon.  At Bishopstoke we stopped, and found Mr. H.,
who received us in his carriage, and took us to his house at Bishops
Waltham.

        On Sunday, we had much discourse on a very rainy day.  My
friends asked, whether there were any Americans? -- any with an
American idea, -- any theory of the right future of that country?
Thus challenged, I bethought myself neither of caucuses nor congress,
neither of presidents nor of cabinet-ministers, nor of such as would
make of America another Europe.  I thought only of the simplest and
purest minds; I said, `Certainly yes; -- but those who hold it are
fanatics of a dream which I should hardly care to relate to your
English ears, to which it might be only ridiculous, -- and yet it is
the only true.' So I opened the dogma of no-government and
non-resistance, and anticipated the objections and the fun, and
procured a kind of hearing for it.  I said, it is true that I have
never seen in any country a man of sufficient valor to stand for this
truth, and yet it is plain to me, that no less valor than this can
command my respect.  I can easily see the bankruptcy of the vulgar
musket-worship, -- though great men be musket-worshippers; -- and
'tis certain, as God liveth, the gun that does not need another gun,
the law of love and justice alone, can effect a clean revolution.  I
fancied that one or two of my anecdotes made some impression on C.,
and I insisted, that the manifest absurdity of the view to English
feasibility could make no difference to a gentleman; that as to our
secure tenure of our mutton-chop and spinage in London or in Boston,
the soul might quote Talleyrand, _"Monsieur, je n'en_ _vois pas la
necessite."_ (* 2) As I had thus taken in the conversation the
saint's part, when dinner was announced, C.  refused to go out before
me, -- "he was altogether too wicked." I planted my back against the
wall, and our host wittily rescued us from the dilemma, by saying, he
was the wickedest, and would walk out first, then C. followed, and I
went last.

        (* 2) _"Mais, Monseigneur, il faut que j'existe."_

        On the way to Winchester, whither our host accompanied us in
the afternoon, my friends asked many questions respecting American
landscape, forests, houses, -- my house, for example.  It is not easy
to answer these queries well.  There I thought, in America, lies
nature sleeping, over-growing, almost conscious, too much by half for
man in the picture, and so giving a certain _tristesse_, like the
rank vegetation of swamps and forests seen at night, steeped in dews
and rains, which it loves; and on it man seems not able to make much
impression.  There, in that great sloven continent, in high Alleghany
pastures, in the sea-wide, sky-skirted prairie, still sleeps and
murmurs and hides the great mother, long since driven away from the
trim hedge-rows and over-cultivated garden of England.  And, in
England, I am quite too sensible of this.  Every one is on his good
behavior, and must be dressed for dinner at six.  So I put off my
friends with very inadequate details, as best I could.

        Just before entering Winchester, we stopped at the Church of Saint
Cross, and, after looking through the quaint antiquity, we demanded a piece
of bread and a draught of beer, which the founder, Henry de Blois, in 1136,
commanded should be given to every one who should ask it at the gate.  We had
both, from the old couple who take care of the church.  Some twenty people,
every day, they said, make the same demand.  This hospitality of seven
hundred years' standing did not hinder C. from pronouncing a malediction on
the priest who receives 2000 pounds a year, that were meant for the poor, and
spends a pittance on this small beer and crumbs.

        In the Cathedral, I was gratified, at least by the ample
dimensions.  The length of line exceeds that of any other English
church; being 556 feet by 250 in breadth of transept.  I think I
prefer this church to all I have seen, except Westminster and York.
Here was Canute buried, and here Alfred the Great was crowned and
buried, and here the Saxon kings: and, later, in his own church,
William of Wykeham.  It is very old: part of the crypt into which we
went down and saw the Saxon and Norman arches of the old church on
which the present stands, was built fourteen or fifteen hundred years
ago.  Sharon Turner says, "Alfred was buried at Winchester, in the
Abbey he had founded there, but his remains were removed by Henry I.
to the new Abbey in the meadows at Hyde, on the northern quarter of
the city, and laid under the high altar.  The building was destroyed
at the Reformation, and what is left of Alfred's body now lies
covered by modern buildings, or buried in the ruins of the old."  (*
3) William of Wykeham's shrine tomb was unlocked for us, and C. took
hold of the recumbent statue's marble hands, and patted them
affectionately, for he rightly values the brave man who built
Windsor, and this Cathedral, and the School here, and New College at
Oxford.  But it was growing late in the afternoon.  Slowly we left
the old house, and parting with our host, we took the train for
London.

        (* 3) History of the Anglo-Saxons, I. 599.

 
        Chapter XVII _Personal_

        In these comments on an old journey now revised after seven
busy yearse much changed men and things in England, I have abstained
from reference to persons, except in the last chapter, and in one or
two cases where the fame of the parties seemed to have given the
public a property in all that concerned them.  I must further allow
myself a few notices, if only as an acknowledgment of debts that
cannot be paid.  My journeys were cheered by so much kindness from
new friends, that my impression of the island is bright with
agreeable memories both of public societies and of households: and,
what is nowhere better found than in England, a cultivated person
fitly surrounded by a happy home, "with honor, love, obedience,
troops of friends," is of all institutions the best.  At the landing
in Liverpool, I found my Manchester correspondent awaiting me, a
gentleman whose kind reception was followed by a train of friendly
and effective attentions which never rested whilst I remained in the
country.  A man of sense and of letters, the editor of a powerful
local journal, he added to solid virtues an infinite sweetness and
_bonhommie_.  There seemed a pool of honey about his heart which
lubricated all his speech and action with fine jets of mead.  An
equal good fortune attended many later accidents of my journey, until
the sincerity of English kindness ceased to surprise.  My visit fell
in the fortunate days when Mr. Bancroft was the American Minister in
London, and at his house, or through his good offices, I had easy
access to excellent persons and to privileged places.  At the house
of Mr. Carlyle, I met persons eminent in society and in letters.  The
privileges of the Athenaeum and of the Reform Clubs were hospitably
opened to me, and I found much advantage in the circles of the
"Geologic," the "Antiquarian," and the "Royal Societies." Every day
in London gave me new opportunities of meeting men and women who give
splendor to society.  I saw Rogers, Hallam, Macaulay, Milnes, Milman,
Barry Cornwall, Dickens, Thackeray, Tennyson, Leigh Hunt, D'Israeli,
Helps, Wilkinson, Bailey, Kenyon, and Forster: the younger poets,
Clough, Arnold, and Patmore; and, among the men of science, Robert
Brown, Owen, Sedgwick, Faraday, Buckland, Lyell, De la Beche, Hooker,
Carpenter, Babbage, and Edward Forbes.  It was my privilege also to
converse with Miss Baillie, with Lady Morgan, with Mrs.  Jameson, and
Mrs. Somerville.  A finer hospitality made many private houses not
less known and dear.  It is not in distinguished circles that wisdom
and elevated characters are usually found, or, if found, not confined
thereto; and my recollections of the best hours go back to private
conversations in different parts of the kingdom, with persons little
known.  Nor am I insensible to the courtesy which frankly opened to
me some noble mansions, if I do not adorn my page with their names.
Among the privileges of London, I recall with pleasure two or three
signal days, one at Kew, where Sir William Hooker showed me all the
riches of the vast botanic garden; one at the Museum, where Sir
Charles Fellowes explained in detail the history of his Ionic
trophy-monument; and still another, on which Mr.  Owen accompanied my
countryman Mr. H. and myself through the Hunterian Museum.

        The like frank hospitality, bent on real service, I found among
the great and the humble, wherever I went; in Birmingham, in Oxford,
in Leicester, in Nottingham, in Sheffield, in Manchester, in
Liverpool.  At Edinburgh, through the kindness of Dr. Samuel Brown, I
made the acquaintance of De Quincey, of Lord Jeffrey, of Wilson, of
Mrs. Crowe, of the Messrs.  Chambers, and of a man of high character
and genius, the short lived painter, David Scott.

        At Ambleside in March, 1848, I was for a couple of days the
guest of Miss Martineau, then newly returned from her Egyptian tour.
On Sunday afternoon, I accompanied her to Rydal Mount.  And as I have
recorded a visit to Wordsworth, many years before, I must not forget
this second interview.  We found Mr. Wordsworth asleep on the sofa.
He was at first silent and indisposed, as an old man suddenly waked,
before he had ended his nap; but soon became full of talk on the
French news.  He was nationally bitter on the French: bitter on
Scotchmen, too.  No Scotchman, he said, can write English.  He
detailed the two models, on one or the other of which all the
sentences of the historian Robertson are framed.  Nor could Jeffrey,
nor the Edinburgh Reviewers write English, nor can , who is a pest to
the English tongue.  Incidentally he added, Gibbon cannot write
English.  The Edinburgh Review wrote what would tell and what would
sell.  It had however changed the tone of its literary criticism from
the time when a certain letter was written to the editor by
Coleridge.  Mrs. W. had the Editor's answer in her possession.
Tennyson he thinks a right poetic genius, though with some
affectation.  He had thought an elder brother of Tennyson at first
the better poet, but must now reckon Alfred the true one.  .  .  .
In speaking of I know not what style, he said, "to be sure, it was
the manner, but then you know the matter always comes out of the
manner." .  .  .  He thought Rio Janeiro the best place in the world
for a great capital city.  .  .  .  We talked of English national
character.  I told him, it was not creditable that no one in all the
country knew anything of Thomas Taylor, the Platonist, whilst in
every American library his translations are found.  I said, if
Plato's Republic were published in England as a new book to-day, do
you think it would find any readers? -- he confessed, it would not:
"and yet," he added after a pause, with that complacency which never
deserts a true-born Englishman, "and yet we have embodied it all."

        His opinions of French, English, Irish, and Scotch, seemed
rashly formulized from little anecdotes of what had befallen himself
and members of his family, in a diligence or stage-coach.  His face
sometimes lighted up, but his conversation was not marked by special
force or elevation.  Yet perhaps it is a high compliment to the
cultivation of the English generally, when we find such a man not
distinguished.  He had a healthy look, with a weather-beaten face,
his face corrugated, especially the large nose.

        Miss Martineau, who lived near him, praised him to me not for
his poetry, but for thrift and economy; for having afforded to his
country-neighbors an example of a modest household, where comfort and
culture were secured without any display.  She said, that, in his
early housekeeping at the cottage where he first lived, he was
accustomed to offer his friends bread and plainest fare: if they
wanted any thing more, they must pay him for their board.  It was the
rule of the house.  I replied, that it evinced English pluck more
than any anecdote I knew.  A gentleman in the neighborhood told the
story of Walter Scott's staying once for a week with Wordsworth, and
slipping out every day under pretence of a walk, to the Swan Inn, for
a cold cut and porter; and one day passing with Wordsworth the inn,
he was betrayed by the landlord's asking him if he had come for his
porter.  Of course, this trait would have another look in London, and
there you will hear from different literary men, that Wordsworth had
no personal friend, that he was not amiable, that he was
parsimonious, &c. Landor, always generous, says, that he never
praised any body.  A gentleman in London showed me a watch that once
belonged to Milton, whose initials are engraved on its face.  He
said, he once showed this to Wordsworth, who took it in one hand,
then drew out his own watch, and held it up with the other, before
the company, but no one making the expected remark, he put back his
own in silence.  I do not attach much importance to the disparagement
of Wordsworth among London scholars.  Who reads him well will know,
that in following the strong bent of his genius, he was careless of
the many, careless also of the few, self-assured that he should
"create the taste by which he is to be enjoyed." He lived long enough
to witness the revolution he had wrought, and "to see what he
foresaw." There are torpid places in his mind, there is something
hard and sterile in his poetry, want of grace and variety, want of
due catholicity and cosmopolitan scope: he had conformities to
English politics and traditions; he had egotistic puerilities in the
choice and treatment of his subjects; but let us say of him, that,
alone in his time he treated the human mind well, and with an
absolute trust.  His adherence to his poetic creed rested on real
inspirations.  The Ode on Immortality is the high-water-mark which
the intellect has reached in this age.  New means were employed, and
new realms added to the empire of the muse, by his courage.

 
 
 
        Chapter XVIII _Result_

        England is the best of actual nations.  It is no ideal
framework, it is an old pile built in different ages, with repairs,
additions, and makeshifts; but you see the poor best you have got.
London is the epitome of our times, and the Rome of to-day.
Broad-fronted broad-bottomed Teutons, they stand in solid phalanx
foursquare to the points of compass; they constitute the modern
world, they have earned their vantage-ground, and held it through
ages of adverse possession.  They are well marked and differing from
other leading races.  England is tender-hearted.  Rome was not.
England is not so public in its bias; private life is its place of
honor.  Truth in private life, untruth in public, marks these
home-loving men.  Their political conduct is not decided by general
views, but by internal intrigues and personal and family interest.
They cannot readily see beyond England.  The history of Rome and
Greece, when written by their scholars, degenerates into English
party pamphlets.  They cannot see beyond England, nor in England can
they transcend the interests of the governing classes.  "English
principles" mean a primary regard to the interests of property.
England, Scotland, and Ireland combine to check the colonies.
England and Scotland combine to check Irish manufactures and trade.
England rallies at home to check Scotland.  In England, the strong
classes check the weaker.  In the home population of near thirty
millions, there are but one million voters.  The Church punishes
dissent, punishes education.  Down to a late day, marriages performed
by dissenters were illegal.  A bitter class-legislation gives power
to those who are rich enough to buy a law.  The game-laws are a
proverb of oppression.  Pauperism incrusts and clogs the state, and
in hard times becomes hideous.  In bad seasons, the porridge was
diluted.  Multitudes lived miserably by shell-fish and sea-ware.  In
cities, the children are trained to beg, until they shall be old
enough to rob.  Men and women were convicted of poisoning scores of
children for burial-fees.  In Irish districts, men deteriorated in
size and shape, the nose sunk, the gums were exposed, with diminished
brain and brutal form.  During the Australian emigration, multitudes
were rejected by the commissioners as being too emaciated for useful
colonists.  During the Russian war, few of those that offered as
recruits were found up to the medical standard, though it had been
reduced.

        The foreign policy of England, though ambitious and lavish of
money, has not often been generous or just.  It has a principal
regard to the interest of trade, checked however by the aristocratic
bias of the ambassador, which usually puts him in sympathy with the
continental Courts.  It sanctioned the partition of Poland, it
betrayed Genoa, Sicily, Parga, Greece, Turkey, Rome, and Hungary.

        Some public regards they have.  They have abolished slavery in
the West Indies, and put an end to human sacrifices in the East.  At
home they have a certain statute hospitality.  England keeps open
doors, as a trading country must, to all nations.  It is one of their
fixed ideas, and wrathfully supported by their laws in unbroken
sequence for a thousand years.  In _Magna Charta_ it was ordained,
that all "merchants shall have safe and secure conduct to go out and
come into England, and to stay there, and to pass as well by land as
by water, to buy and sell by the ancient allowed customs, without any
evil toll, except in time of war, or when they shall be of any nation
at war with us." It is a statute and obliged hospitality, and
peremptorily maintained.  But this shop-rule had one magnificent
effect.  It extends its cold unalterable courtesy to political exiles
of every opinion, and is a fact which might give additional light to
that portion of the planet seen from the farthest star.  But this
perfunctory hospitality puts no sweetness into their unaccommodating
manners, no check on that puissant nationality which makes their
existence incompatible with all that is not English.

        What we must say about a nation is a superficial dealing with
symptoms.  We cannot go deep enough into the biography of the spirit
who never throws himself entire into one hero, but delegates his
energy in parts or spasms to vicious and defective individuals.  But
the wealth of the source is seen in the plenitude of English nature.
What variety of power and talent; what facility and plenteousness of
knighthood, lordship, ladyship, royalty, loyalty; what a proud
chivalry is indicated in "Collins's Peerage," through eight hundred
years!  What dignity resting on what reality and stoutness!  What
courage in war, what sinew in labor, what cunning workmen, what
inventors and engineers, what seamen and pilots, what clerks and
scholars!  No one man and no few men can represent them.  It is a
people of myriad personalities.  Their many-headedness is owing to
the advantageous position of the middle class, who are always the
source of letters and science.  Hence the vast plenty of their
aesthetic production.  As they are many-headed, so they are
many-nationed: their colonization annexes archipelagoes and
continents, and their speech seems destined to be the universal
language of men.  I have noted the reserve of power in the English
temperament.  In the island, they never let out all the length of all
the reins, there is no Berserkir rage, no abandonment or ecstasy of
will or intellect, like that of the Arabs in the time of Mahomet, or
like that which intoxicated France in 1789.  But who would see the
uncoiling of that tremendous spring, the explosion of their
well-husbanded forces, must follow the swarms which pouring now for
two hundred years from the British islands, have sailed, and rode,
and traded, and planted, through all climates, mainly following the
belt of empire, the temperate zones, carrying the Saxon seed, with
its instinct for liberty and law, for arts and for thought, --
acquiring under some skies a more electric energy than the native air
allows, -- to the conquest of the globe.  Their colonial policy,
obeying the necessities of a vast empire, has become liberal.  Canada
and Australia have been contented with substantial independence.
They are expiating the wrongs of India, by benefits; first, in works
for the irrigation of the peninsula, and roads and telegraphs; and
secondly, in the instruction of the people, to qualify them for
self-government, when the British power shall be finally called home.

        Their mind is in a state of arrested development, -- a divine
cripple like Vulcan; a blind _savant_ like Huber and Sanderson.  They
do not occupy themselves on matters of general and lasting import,
but on a corporeal civilization, on goods that perish in the using.
But they read with good intent, and what they learn they incarnate.
The English mind turns every abstraction it can receive into a
portable utensil, or a working institution.  Such is their tenacity,
and such their practical turn, that they hold all they gain.  Hence
we say, that only the English race can be trusted with freedom, --
freedom which is double-edged and dangerous to any but the wise and
robust.  The English designate the kingdoms emulous of free
institutions, as the sentimental nations.  Their culture is not an
outside varnish, but is thorough and secular in families and the
race.  They are oppressive with their temperament, and all the more
that they are refined.  I have sometimes seen them walk with my
countrymen when I was forced to allow them every advantage, and their
companions seemed bags of bones.

        There is cramp limitation in their habit of thought, sleepy
routine, and a tortoise's instinct to hold hard to the ground with
his claws, lest he should be thrown on his back.  There is a drag of
inertia which resists reform in every shape; -- law-reform,
army-reform, extension of suffrage, Jewish franchise, Catholic
emancipation, -- the abolition of slavery, of impressment, penal
code, and entails.  They praise this drag, under the formula, that it
is the excellence of the British constitution, that no law can
anticipate the public opinion.  These poor tortoises must hold hard,
for they feel no wings sprouting at their shoulders.  Yet somewhat
divine warms at their heart, and waits a happier hour.  It hides in
their sturdy will.  "Will," said the old philosophy, "is the measure
of power," and personality is the token of this race.  _Quid vult
valde vult_.  What they do they do with a will.  You cannot account
for their success by their Christianity, commerce, charter, common
law, Parliament, or letters, but by the contumacious sharptongued
energy of English _naturel_, with a poise impossible to disturb,
which makes all these its instruments.  They are slow and reticent,
and are like a dull good horse which lets every nag pass him, but
with whip and spur will run down every racer in the field.  They are
right in their feeling, though wrong in their speculation.

        The feudal system survives in the steep inequality of property
and privilege, in the limited franchise, in the social barriers which
confine patronage and promotion to a caste, and still more in the
submissive ideas pervading these people.  The fagging of the schools
is repeated in the social classes.  An Englishman shows no mercy to
those below him in the social scale, as he looks for none from those
above him: any forbearance from his superiors surprises him, and they
suffer in his good opinion.  But the feudal system can be seen with
less pain on large historical grounds.  It was pleaded in mitigation
of the rotten borough, that it worked well, that substantial justice
was done.  Fox, Burke, Pitt, Erskine, Wilberforce, Sheridan, Romilly,
or whatever national man, were by this means sent to Parliament, when
their return by large constituencies would have been doubtful.  So
now we say, that the right measures of England are the men it bred;
that it has yielded more able men in five hundred years than any
other nation; and, though we must not play Providence, and balance
the chances of producing ten great men against the comfort of ten
thousand mean men, yet retrospectively we may strike the balance, and
prefer one Alfred, one Shakspeare, one Milton, one Sidney, one
Raleigh, one Wellington, to a million foolish democrats.

        The American system is more democratic, more humane; yet the
American people do not yield better or more able men, or more
inventions or books or benefits, than the English.  Congress is not
wiser or better than Parliament.  France has abolished its
suffocating old _regime_, but is not recently marked by any more
wisdom or virtue.

        The power of performance has not been exceeded, -- the creation
of value.  The English have given importance to individuals, a
principal end and fruit of every society.  Every man is allowed and
encouraged to be what he is, and is guarded in the indulgence of his
whim.  "Magna Charta," said Rushworth, "is such a fellow that he will
have no sovereign." By this general activity, and by this sacredness
of individuals, they have in seven hundred years evolved the
principles of freedom.  It is the land of patriots, martyrs, sages,
and bards, and if the ocean out of which it emerged should wash it
away, it will be remembered as an island famous for immortal laws,
for the announcements of original right which make the stone tables
of liberty.

 
 
 
        Chapter XIX _Speech at Manchester_

        A few days after my arrival at Manchester, in November, 1847,
the Manchester Athenaeum gave its annual Banquet in the Free-Trade
Hall.  With other guests, I was invited to be present, and to address
the company.  In looking over recently a newspaper-report of my
remarks, I incline to reprint it, as fitly expressing the feeling
with which I entered England, and which agrees well enough with the
more deliberate results of better acquaintance recorded in the
foregoing pages.  Sir Archibald Alison, the historian, presided, and
opened the meeting with a speech.  He was followed by Mr. Cobden,
Lord Brackley, and others, among whom was Mr. Cruikshank, one of the
contributors to "Punch." Mr. Dickens's letter of apology for his
absence was read.  Mr. Jerrold, who had been announced, did not
appear.  On being introduced to the meeting I said, --

        Mr. Chairman and Gentlemen: It is pleasant to me to meet this
great and brilliant company, and doubly pleasant to see the faces of
so many distinguished persons on this platform.  But I have known all
these persons already.  When I was at home, they were as near to me
as they are to you.  The arguments of the League and its leader are
known to all the friends of free trade.  The gayeties and genius, the
political, the social, the parietal wit of "Punch" go duly every
fortnight to every boy and girl in Boston and New York.  Sir, when I
came to sea, I found the "History of Europe" (* 1) on the ship's
cabin table, the property of the captain;--a sort of programme or
play-bill to tell the seafaring New Englander what he shall find on
his landing here.  And as for Dombey, sir, there is no land where
paper exists to print on, where it is not found; no man who can read,
that does not read it, and, if he cannot, he finds some charitable
pair of eyes that can, and hears it.

        (* 1) By Sir A. Alison.

        But these things are not for me to say; these compliments,
though true, would better come from one who felt and understood these
merits more.  I am not here to exchange civilities with you, but
rather to speak of that which I am sure interests these gentlemen
more than their own praises; of that which is good in holidays and
working-days, the same in one century and in another century.  That
which lures a solitary American in the woods with the wish to see
England, is the moral peculiarity of the Saxon race, -- its
commanding sense of right and wrong, -- the love and devotion to
that, -- this is the imperial trait, which arms them with the sceptre
of the globe.  It is this which lies at the foundation of that
aristocratic character, which certainly wanders into strange
vagaries, so that its origin is often lost sight of, but which, if it
should lose this, would find itself paralyzed; and in trade, and in
the mechanic's shop, gives that honesty in performance, that
thoroughness and solidity of work, which is a national
characteristic.  This conscience is one element, and the other is
that loyal adhesion, that habit of friendship, that homage of man to
man, running through all classes, -- the electing of worthy persons
to a certain fraternity, to acts of kindness and warm and staunch
support, from year to year, from youth to age, -- which is alike
lovely and honorable to those who render and those who receive it; --
which stands in strong contrast with the superficial attachments of
other races, their excessive courtesy, and short-lived connection.

        You will think me very pedantic, gentlemen, but holiday though
it be, I have not the smallest interest in any holiday, except as it
celebrates real and not pretended joys; and I think it just, in this
time of gloom and commercial disaster, of affliction and beggary in
these districts, that, on these very accounts I speak of, you should
not fail to keep your literary anniversary.  I seem to hear you say,
that, for all that is come and gone yet, we will not reduce by one
chaplet or one oak leaf the braveries of our annual feast.  For I
must tell you, I was given to understand in my childhood, that the
British island from which my forefathers came, was no lotus-garden,
no paradise of serene sky and roses and music and merriment all the
year round, no, but a cold foggy mournful country, where nothing grew
well in the open air, but robust men and virtuous women, and these of
a wonderful fibre and endurance; that their best parts were slowly
revealed; their virtues did not come out until they quarrelled: they
did not strike twelve the first time; good lovers, good haters, and
you could know little about them till you had seen them long, and
little good of them till you had seen them in action; that in
prosperity they were moody and dumpish, but in adversity they were
grand.  Is it not true, sir, that the wise ancients did not praise
the ship parting with flying colors from the port, but only that
brave sailer which came back with torn sheets and battered sides,
stript of her banners, but having ridden out the storm?  And so,
gentlemen, I feel in regard to this aged England, with the
possessions, honors and trophies, and also with the infirmities of a
thousand years gathering around her, irretrievably committed as she
now is to many old customs which cannot be suddenly changed; pressed
upon by the transitions of trade, and new and all incalculable modes,
fabrics, arts, machines, and competing populations, -- I see her not
dispirited, not weak, but well remembering that she has seen dark
days before; -- indeed with a kind of instinct that she sees a little
better in a cloudy day, and that in storm of battle and calamity, she
has a secret vigor and a pulse like a cannon.  I see her in her old
age, not decrepit, but young, and still daring to believe in her
power of endurance and expansion.  Seeing this, I say, All hail!
mother of nations, mother of heroes, with strength still equal to the
time; still wise to entertain and swift to execute the policy which
the mind and heart of mankind requires in the present hour, and thus
only hospitable to the foreigner, and truly a home to the thoughtful
and generous who are born in the soil.  So be it! so let it be!  If
it be not so, if the courage of England goes with the chances of a
commercial crisis, I will go back to the capes of Massachusetts, and
my own Indian stream, and say to my countrymen, the old race are all
gone, and the elasticity and hope of mankind must henceforth remain
on the Alleghany ranges, or nowhere.

.
